Hobbits were big when I was nineteen (a number of some import in the stories you are about to read). 
There were probably half a dozen Merrys and Pippins slog-ging through the mud at Max Yasgur's farm during the Great Woodstock Music Festival, twice as many Frodos, and hippie Gandalfs without number. 
J. R. R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings was madly popular in those days, and while I never made it to Woodstock (say sorry), I suppose I was at least a halfling-hippie. 
Enough of one, at any rate, to have read the books and fallen in love with them. 
The Dark Tower books, like most long fantasy tales written by men and women of my generation (The Chroni-cles of Thomas Covenant, by Stephen Donaldson, and The Sword of Shannara, by Terry Brooks, are just two of many), were bornout of Tolkien's. 
But although I read the books in 1966 and 1967, I held offwriting. 
I responded (and with rather touching wholeheartedness) to the sweep of Tolkien's imagination-to the ambition of his story-but I wanted to write my own kind of story, and had I started then, I would have written his. 
That, as the late Tricky Dick Nixon was fond of saying, would have been wrong. 
Thanks to Mr. Tolkien, the twentieth century had all the elves and wizards it needed. 
In 1967, I didn't have any idea what my kind of story might be, but that didn't matter; I felt positive I'd know it when it passed me on the street. 
I was nineteen and arrogant. 
Certainly arrogant enough to feel I could wait a little while on my muse and my masterpiece (as I was sure it would be). 
At nineteen, it seems to me, one has a right to be arrogant; time has usually not begun its stealthy and rotten subtractions. 
It takes away your hair and your jump-shot, according to a popular country song, but in truth it takes away a lot more than that. 
I didn't know it in 1966 and '67, and if I had, I wouldn't have cared. 
I could imagine-barely- being forty, but fifty? 
No. 
Sixty? 
Never! 
Sixty was out of the question. 
And at nineteen, that's just the way to be. 
Nineteen is the age where you say Look out, world, I'm smokin'TNT and I'm drinkin' dynamite, so if you know what's good for ya, get out of my way-here comes Stevie. 
Nineteen's a selfish age and finds one's cares tightly circumscribed. 
I had a lot of reach, and I cared about that. 
I had a lot of ambition, and I cared about that. 
I had a typewriter that I carried from one shithole apartment to the next, always with a deck of smokes in my pocket and a smile on my face. 
The compromises of middle age were distant, the insults of old age over the horizon. 
Like the protagonist in that Bob Seger song they now use to sell the trucks, I felt endlessly powerful and endlessly optimistic; my pockets were empty, but my head was full of things I wanted to say and my heart was full of stories I wanted to tell. 
Sounds corny now; felt wonderful then. 
Felt very cool. 
More than anything else I wanted to get inside my readers' defenses, wanted to rip them and ravish them and change them forever with nothing but story. 
And I felt I could do those things. 
I felt I had been made to do those things. 
How conceited does that sound? 
A lot or a little? 
Either way, I don't apologize. 
I was nineteen. 
There was not so much as astrand of gray in my beard. 
I had three pairs of jeans, one pair of boots, the idea that the world was my oyster, and nothing that happened in the next twenty years proved me wrong. 
Then, around the age of thirty-nine, my troubles set in: drink, drugs, a road accident that changed the way I walked (among other things). 
I've written about them at length and need not write about them here. 
Besides, it's the same for you, right? 
The world eventually sends out a mean-ass Patrol Boy to slow your progress and show you who's boss. 
You reading this have undoubtedly met yours (or will); I met mine, and I'm sure he'll be back. 
He's got my address. 
He's a mean guy, a Bad Lieutenant, the sworn enemy of goofery, fuckery, pride, ambition, loud music, and all things nineteen. 
But I still think that's a pretty fine age. 
Maybe the best age. 
You can rock and roll all night, but when the music dies out and the beer wears off, you're able to think. 
And dream big dreams. 
The mean Patrol Boy cuts you down to size eventually, and if you start out small, why, there's almost nothing left but the cuffs of your pants when he's done with you. 
"Got another one! 
" he shouts, and strides on with his citation book in his hand. 
So a little arrogance (or even a lot) isn't such a bad thing, although your mother undoubtedly told you different. 
Mine did.
Pride goeth before a fall, Stephen, she said ... and then I found out-rightaround the age that is 19 x 2-that eventually you fall down, anyway. 
Or get pushed into the ditch. 
At nineteen they can card you in the bars and tell you to get the fuck out, put your sorry act (and
sorrier ass) back on the street, but they can't card you when you sit down to paint a picture, write a poem, or tell a story, by God, and if you reading this happen to be very young, don't let your elders and supposed betters tell you any different. 
Sure, you've never been to Paris. 
No, you never ran with the bulls at Pamplona. 
Yes, you're a pissant who had no hair in your armpits until three years ago-but so what? 
If you don't start out too big for your britches, how are you gonna fill 'em when you grow up? 
Let it rip regardless of what anybody tells you, that's my idea; sit down and smoke that baby. 
I think novelists come in two types, and that includes the sort of fledgling novelist I was by 1970. 
Those who are bound for the more literary or "serious" side of the job examine every possible subject in light of this question: What would writing this sort ofstory mean to me? 
Those whose destiny (or ka, if you like) is to include the writing of popular novels are apt to ask a very different one: What would writing this sort of story mean to others? 
The "serious" novelist is looking for answers and keys to the self; the "popular" novelist is looking for an audience. 
Both kinds of writer are equally selfish. 
I've known a good many, and will set my watch and warrant upon it. 
Anyway, I believe that even at the age of nineteen, I recog-nized the story of Frodo and his efforts to rid himself of the One Great Ring as one belonging to the second group. 
They were the adventures of an essentially British band of pilgrims set against a backdrop of vaguely Norse mythology. 
I liked the idea of the quest-loved it, in fact-but I had no interest in either Tolkien's sturdy peasant characters (that's not to say I didn't like them, because I did) or his bosky Scandinavian settings. 
If I tried going in that direction, I'd get it all wrong. 
So I waited. 
By 1970 I was twenty-two, the first strands of gray had showed up in my beard (I think smoking two and a half packs of Pall Malls a day probably had something to do with that), but even at twenty-two, one can afford to wait. 
At twenty-two, time is still on one's side, although even then that bad old Patrol Boy's in the neighborhood and asking questions. 
Then, in an almost completely empty movie theater (the Bijou, in Bangor, Maine, if it matters), I saw a film directed by Sergio Leone. 
It was called The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly,and before the film was even half over, I realized that what I wanted to write was a novel that contained Tolkien's sense of quest and magic but set against Leone's almost absurdly majestic Western backdrop. 
If you've only seen this gonzo Western on your television screen, you don't understand what I'm talking about-cry your pardon, but it's true. 
On a movie screen, projected through the correct Panavision lenses, TG, TB, & TUis an epic to rival Ben-Hur. 
Clint Eastwood appears roughly eighteen feet tall, witheach wiry jut of stubble on his cheeks looking roughly the size of a young redwood tree. 
The grooves bracketing Lee Van Cleef's mouth are as deep as canyons, and there could be a thinny (see Wizard and Glass) at the bottom of each one. 
The desert settings appear to stretch at least out as far as the orbit of the planet Neptune. 
And the barrel of each gun looks to be roughly as large as the Holland Tunnel. 
What I wanted even more than the setting was that feeling of epic, apocalyptic size. 
The fact that Leone knew jack shit about American geography (according to one of the characters, Chicago is somewhere in the vicinity of Phoenix, Arizona) added to the film's sense of magnificent dislocation. 
And in my enthusiasm-the sort only a young person can muster, I think-I wanted to write not just a long book, but the longest popular novel in history. 
I did not succeed in doing that, but I feel I had a decent rip; The Dark Tower, volumes one through seven, really comprise a single tale, and the first four volumes run to just over two thousand pages in paperback. 
The final three volumes run another twenty-five hundred in manuscript. 
I'm not trying to imply here that length has anything whatsoever to do with quality; I'm just saying that I wanted to write an epic, and in some ways, I succeeded. 
If you were to ask me why I wanted to do that, I couldn't tell you. 
Maybe it's a part of growing up American: build the tallest, dig the deepest, write the longest. 
And that head-scratching puzzlement when the question of motivation comes up? 
Seems to me that that is also part of being an American. 
In the end we are reduced to saying It seemed like a good idea at the time. 
Another thing about being nineteen, do it please ya: it is the age, I think, where a lot of us somehow get stuck (mentally and emotionally, if not physically). 
The years slide by and one day you find yourself looking into the mirror with real puzzlement. 
Why are those lines on my face? 
you wonder. Where did that stupid potbelly come from? 
Hell, I'm only nineteen! 
This is hardly an original concept, but that in no way subtracts from one's amazement. 
Time puts gray in your beard, time takes away your jump-shot, and all the while you're thinking-silly you-that it's still on your side. 
The logical side of you knows better, but your heart refuses to believe it. 
If you're lucky, the Patrol Boy who cited you for going too fast and having too much fun also gives you a dose of smelling salts. 
That was more or less what happened to near the end of the twentieth century. 
It came in the form of a Plymouth van that knocked me into the ditch beside a road in my hometown. 
About three years after that accident I did a book signing for From a Buick 8at a Borders store in Dearborn, Michigan. 
Whenone guy got to the head of the line, he said he was really, really glad that I was still alive. 
(I get this a lot, and it beats the shit out of "Why the hell didn't you die?") 
"I was with this good friend of mine when we heard you got popped," he said. 
"Man, we just started shaking our heads and saying "There goes the Tower, it's tilting, it's falling, ahhh, shit, he'll never finish it now. 
'"A version of the same idea had occurred to me the troubling idea that, having built the Dark Tower in the collective imagination of a million readers, I might have a responsibility to make it safe for as long as people wanted to read about it. 
That might be for only five years; for all I know, it might be five hundred. 
Fantasy stories, the bad as well as the good (even now, someone out there is probably reading Varney the Vampireor The Monk), seem to have long shelf lives. 
Roland's way of protecting the Tower is to try to remove the threat to the Beams that hold the Tower up. 
I would have to do it, I realized after my accident, by finishing the gunslinger's story. 
During the long pauses between the writing and publication of the first four Dark Towertales, I received hundreds of "pack your bags, we're going on a guilt trip" letters. 
In 1998 (when I was laboring under the mistaken impression that I was still basically nineteen, in other words), I got one from an "82-yr-old Gramma, don't mean to Bother You w/ My Troubles BUT!! 
very Sick These Days. 
" The Gramma told me she probably had only a year to live ("14 Mo's at Outside, Cancer all thru Me"), and while she didn't expect me to finish Roland's tale in that time just forher, she wanted to know if I couldn't please (please) just tell herhow it came out. 
The line that wrenched my heart (although not quite enough to start writing again) was her promise to "not tell a Single Soul. 
"A year later-probably after the accident that landed me in the hospital-one of my assistants, Marsha DiFilippo, got a letter from a fellow on death row in either Texas or Florida, wanting to know essentially the same thing: how does it come out? 
(He promised to take the secret to the grave with him, which gave me the creeps.)
I would have given both of these folks what they wanted-asummary of Roland's further adventures-if I could have done, but alas, I couldn't. 
I had no idea of how things were going to turn out with the gunslinger and his friends. 
To know, I have to write. 
I once had an outline, but I lost it along the way. 
(It probably wasn't worth a tin shit, anyway. 
) All I had was a few notes
("Chussit, chissit, chassit,something-something-basket" reads one lying on the desk as I write this). 
 Eventually, starting in July
of 2001, I began to write again. 
 I knew by then I was no longer
nineteen, nor exempt from any of the ills to which the flesh is
heir. 
 I knew I was going to be sixty, maybe even seventy. 
 And I
wanted to finish my story before the bad Patrol Boy came for the
last time. 
 I had no urge to be filed away with The CanterburyTalesand The Mystery of Edwin Drood. 
The result-for better or worse-lies before you, Constant Reader, whether you reading this are starting with Volume One or
are preparing for Volume Five. 
 Like it or hate it, the story of
Roland is now done. 
 I hope you enjoy it. 
As for me, I had the time of my life. 

Most of what writers write about their work is ill-informed bullshit. 
* That is why you have never seen a book entitled One Hundred Great Introductions of Western Civilization or Best-Loved Forewords of the American People. 
This is a judgment call on my part, of course, but after writing at least fifty introductions and forewords-not to mention an entire book about the craft of fiction I think it's one I have a right to make. 
 And I think you can
take me seriously when I tell you this might be one of those rare
occasions upon which I actually have something worth saying. 
A few years ago, I created some furor among my readers by offering a revised and expanded version of my novel The Stand. 
 I was justifiably nervous about that book, because The Stand has always been the novel my readers have loved the best (as far as
the most passionate of the "Stand-fans" are concerned, I could have died in 1980 without making the world a noticeably poorer
place). 
If there is a story that rivals The Stand in the imagination of * For a fuller discussion of the Bullshit Factor, see On Writing, published by Scribner's in 2000. 

King readers, it's probably the tale of Roland Deschain and hissearch for the Dark Tower. 
 And now-goddamn! 
-I've gone and
done the same thing again. 
Except I haven't, not really, and I want you to know it. 
 I also want you to know what I have done, and why. 
 It may not be important to you, but it's very important to me, and thus this foreword is exempt (I hope) from King's Bullshit Rule. 
First, please be reminded that The Stand sustained deep cuts in manuscript not for editorial reasons but for financial ones. 
(Therewere binding limitations, too, but I don't even want to go there. 
) What I reinstated in the late eighties were revised sec-
tions of preexisting manuscript. 
 I also revised the work as a whole,mostly to acknowledge the AIDS epidemic, which blossomed 
(if that is the word) between the first issue of The Stand and the publication of the revised version eight or nine years later. 

The result was a volume about 100,000 words longer than the
original. 
In the case of The Gunslinger, the original volume was slim,and the added material in this version amounts to a mere thirty-
five pages, or about nine thousand words. 
 If you have read The Gunslinger before, you'll only find two or three totally newscenes here. 
 Dark Tower purists (of which there are a surprising
number-just check the Web) will want to read the book again, of
course, and most of them are apt to do so with a mixture of curiosity and irritation. 
 I sympathize, but must say I'm less concerned with them than with readers who have never encountered
Roland and his ka-tet. 
*In spite of its fervent followers, the tale of the Tower is farless known by my readers than is The Stand. 
 Sometimes, when I  * Those bound by destiny. 

do readings, I'll ask those present to raise their hands if they've read one or more of my novels. 
 Since they've bothered to come at
all-sometimes going to the added inconvenience of hiring a
baby-sitter and incurring the added expense of gassing up the old
sedan-it comes as no surprise that most of them raise their
hands. 
 Then I'll ask them to keep their hands up if they've read
one or more of the Dark Tower stories. 
 When I do that, at least
half the hands in the hall invariably go down. 
 The conclusion is
clear enough: although I've spent an inordinate amount of time
writing these books in the thirty-three years between 1970 and
2003, comparatively few people have read them. 
 Yet those who
have are passionate about them, and I'm fairly passionate myself-
enough so, in any case, that I was never able to let Roland creep
away into that exile which is the unhappy home of unfulfilled
characters (think of Chaucer's pilgrims on the way to Canterbury,
or the people who populate Charles Dickens's unfinished final
novel, The Mystery of Edwin Drood). 
I think that I'd always assumed (somewhere in the back of my mind, for I cannot ever remember thinking about this con-
sciously) that there would be time to finish, that perhaps God
would even send me a singing telegram at the appointed hour:
"Deedle-dum, deedle-dower/Get back to work, Stephen,/Finish
the Tower. 
" And in a way, something like that really did happen,
although it wasn't a singing telegram but a close encounter with a
Plymouth minivan that got me going again. 
 If the vehicle that
struck me that day had been a little bigger, or if the hit had been
just a little squarer, it would have been a case of mourners please
omit flowers, the King family thanks you for your sympathy. 
 And
Roland's quest would have remained forever unfinished, at least
by me. 
In any case, in 2001-by which time I'd begun to feel more

myself again-I decided the time had come to finish Roland's story. 
 I pushed everything else aside and set to work on the final
three books. 
 As always, I did this not so much for the readers who
demanded it as for myself. 
Although the revisions of the last two volumes still remain to be done as I write this in the winter of 2003, the books themselves were finished last summer. 
 And, in the hiatus between the
editorial work on Volume Five (Wolves of the Calla) and Volume Six (Song of Susannah), I decided the time had come to go back to the beginning and start the final overall revisions. 
 Why? 
 Because these seven volumes were never really separate stories at
all, but sections of a single long novel called The Dark Tower, andthe beginning was out of sync with the ending. 
My approach to revision hasn't changed much over the years. 
I know there are writers who do it as they go along, but my
method of attack has always been to plunge in and go as fast as I
can, keeping the edge of my narrative blade as sharp as possible
by constant use, and trying to outrun the novelist's most insidious
enemy, which is doubt. 
 Looking back prompts too many questions: How believable are my characters? 
 How interesting is my story? 
 How good is this, really? 
 Will anyone care? 
 Do I care myself? 
When my first draft of a novel is done, I put it away, warts and all, to mellow. 
 Some period of time later-six months, a year, two years, it doesn't really matter-I can come back to it with a cooler (but still loving) eye, and begin the task of revising. 
 And although each book of the Tower series was revised as a separate entity, I never really looked at the work as a whole until I'd finished Volume Seven, The Dark Tower. 
When I looked back at the first volume, which you now holdin your hands, three obvious truths presented themselves. 
 The first was that The Gunslinger had been written by a very young man, and had all the problems of a very young man's book. 
 The second was that it contained a great many errors and false starts, particularly in light of the volumes that followed. 
* The third was that The Gunslinger did not even sound like the later books-it was, frankly, rather difficult to read. 
 All too often I heard myself apologizing for it, and telling people that if they persevered, they would find the story really found its voice in The Drawing of the Three. 
At one point in The Gunslinger, Roland is described as the sort of man who would straighten pictures in strange hotel rooms. 

I'm that sort of guy myself, and to some extent, that is all that
rewriting amounts to: straightening the pictures, vacuuming the
floors, scrubbing the toilets. 
 I did a great deal of housework in the
course of this revision, and have had a chance to do what any
writer wants to do with a work that is finished but still needs a
final polish and tune-up: just make it right. 
Once you know how things come out, you owe it to the potential reader-and to
yourself-to go back and put things in order. 
 That is what I have
tried to do here, always being careful that no addition or change
should give away the secrets hidden in the last three books of the
cycle, secrets I have been patiently keeping for as long as thirty
years in some cases. 
Before I close, I should say a word about the younger manwho dared to write this book. 
 That young man had been exposed
to far too many writing seminars, and had grown far too used to
the ideas those seminars promulgate: that one is writing for other  * One example of this will probably serve for all. 
 In the previously issued text of The Gunslinger, Farson is the name of a town. 
 In later volumes, it somehow became the name of a man:the rebel John Farson, who engineers the fall of Gilead, the city-state where Roland spends his childhood. 


people rather than one's self; that language is more important than story; that ambiguity is to be preferred over clarity and sim-
plicity, which are usually signs of a thick and literal mind. 
 As a result, I was not surprised to find a high degree of pretension in Roland's debut appearance (not to mention what seemed like thousands of unnecessary adverbs). 
 I removed as much of this
hollow blather as I could, and do not regret a single cut made in
that regard. 
 In other places-invariably those where I'd been se-
duced into forgetting the writing seminar ideas by some particularly entrancing piece of story-I was able to let the writing
almost entirely alone, save for the usual bits of revision any
writer needs to do. 
 As I have pointed out in another context, only
God gets it right the first time. 
In any case, I didn't want to muzzle or even really change the way this story is told; for all its faults, it has its own special
charms, it seems to me. 
 To change it too completely would have
been to repudiate the person who first wrote of the gunslinger in
the late spring and early summer of 1970, and that I did not want
to do. 
What I did want to do-and before the final volumes of the series came out, if possible-was to give newcomers to the tale of
the Tower (and old readers who want to refresh their memories) a
clearer start and a slightly easier entry into Roland's world. 
 I also
wanted them to have a volume that more effectively foreshadowed coming events. 
 I hope I have done that. 
 And if you are one
of those who have never visited the strange world through which
Roland and his friends move, I hope you will enjoy the marvels
you find there. 
 More than anything else, I wanted to tell a tale of
wonder. 
 If you find yourself falling under the spell of the Dark
Tower, even a little bit, I reckon I will have done my job, which
was begun in 1970 and largely finished in 2003. 
 Yet Roland

would be the first to point out that such a span of time means very little. 
 In fact, when one quests for the Dark Tower, time is a matter of no concern at all. 

... 
a stone, a leaf, an unfound door; of a leaf, a stone, a door. 
And of all the forgotten faces. 
Naked and alone we came into exile. 
 In her dark womb, wedid not know our mother's face; from the prison of her flesh have
we come into the unspeakable and incommunicable prison of this
earth. 
Which of us has known his brother? 
 Which of us has looked into his father's heart? 
 Which of us has not remained forever
prison-pent? 
 Which of us is not forever a stranger and alone? 
. 
. 
. 
 O lost, and by the wind grieved, ghost, come back again. 
Thomas Wolfe Look Homeward, Angel.

CHAPTER ONE
The Gunslinger
The man in black fled across the desert, and the gunslinger followed. 
The desert was the apotheosis of all deserts, huge, standing to the sky for what looked like eternity in all directions. 
 It was white
and blinding and waterless and without feature save for the faint,
cloudy haze of the mountains which sketched themselves on the
horizon and the devil-grass which brought sweet dreams, night-
mares, death. 
 An occasional tombstone sign pointed the way, for
once the drifted track that cut its way through the thick crust of
alkali had been a highway. 
 Coaches and buckas had followed it. 

The world had moved on since then. 
 The world had emptied. 
The gunslinger had been struck by a momentary dizziness, a kind of yawing sensation that made the entire world seem
ephemeral, almost a thing that could be looked through. 
 It passed
and, like the world upon whose hide he walked, he moved on. 
 He
passed the miles stolidly, not hurrying, not loafing. 
 A hide waterbag was slung around his middle like a bloated sausage. 
 It was
almost full. 
 He had progressed through the khef over many years,and had reached perhaps the fifth level. 
 Had he been a Manni
holy man, he might not have even been thirsty; he could have

watched his own body dehydrate with clinical, detached attention, watering its crevices and dark inner hollows only when his
logic told him it must be done. 
 He was not a Manni, however, nor
a follower of the Man Jesus, and considered himself in no way
holy. 
 He was just an ordinary pilgrim, in other words, and all he
could say with real certainty was that he was thirsty. 
 And even so,
he had no particular urge to drink. 
 In a vague way, all this pleased
him. 
 It was what the country required, it was a thirsty country,
and he had in his long life been nothing if not adaptable. 
Below the waterbag were his guns, carefully weighted to his hands; a plate had been added to each when they had come to him
from his father, who had been lighter and not so tall. 
 The two
belts crisscrossed above his crotch. 
 The holsters were oiled too
deeply for even this Philistine sun to crack. 
 The stocks of the
guns were sandalwood, yellow and finely grained. 
 Rawhide tiedowns held the holsters loosely to his thighs, and they swung a bit
with his step; they had rubbed away the bluing of his jeans (and
thinned the cloth) in a pair of arcs that looked almost like smiles. 

The brass casings of the cartridges looped into the gunbelts heliographed in the sun. 
 There were fewer now. 
 The leather made subtle creaking noises. 
His shirt, the no-color of rain or dust, was open at the throat,with a rawhide thong dangling loosely in hand-punched eyelets. 

His hat was gone. 
 So was the horn he had once carried; gone for
years, that horn, spilled from the hand of a dying friend, and he
missed them both. 
He breasted a gently rising dune (although there was no sand here; the desert was hardpan, and even the harsh winds that blew
when dark came raised only an aggravating harsh dust like scouring powder) and saw the kicked remains of a tiny campfire on the
lee side, the side the sun would quit earliest. 
 Small signs like this,

once more affirming the man in black's possible humanity, never failed to please him. 
 His lips stretched in the pitted, flaked remains of his face. 
 The grin was gruesome, painful. 
 He squatted. 
His quarry had burned the devil-grass, of course. 
 It was the only thing out here that would burn. 
 It burned with a greasy, flatlight, and it burned slow. 
 Border dwellers had told him that devils
lived even in the flames. 
 They burned it but would not look into
the light. 
 They said the devils hypnotized, beckoned, would even-
tually draw the one who looked into the fires. 
 And the next man
foolish enough to look into the fire might see you. 
The burned grass was crisscrossed in the now familiar ideographic pattern, and crumbled to gray senselessness before the
gunslinger's prodding hand. 
 There was nothing in the remains but
a charred scrap of bacon, which he ate thoughtfully. 
 It had always
been this way. 
 The gunslinger had followed the man in black
across the desert for two months now, across the endless, scream-
ingly monotonous purgatorial wastes, and had yet to find spoor
other than the hygienic sterile ideographs of the man in black's
campfires. 
 He had not found a can, a bottle, or a waterbag (the
gunslinger had left four of those behind, like dead snakeskins). 

He hadn't found any dung. 
 He assumed the man in black buried it. 
Perhaps the campfires were a message, spelled out one Great Letter at a time. 
 Keep your distance, partner, it might say. 
 Or, The end draweth nigh. 
Or maybe even, Come and get me. 
It didn't matter what they said or didn't say. 
 He had no interest in messages, if messages they were. 
 What mattered was that these remains were as cold as all the others. 
 Yet he had gained. 
 He knew
he was closer, but did not know how he knew. 
 A kind of smell,
perhaps. 
 That didn't matter, either. 
 He would keep going until
something changed, and if nothing changed, he would keep going, anyway. 
 There would be water if God willed it, the old timers

said. 
 Water if God willed it, even in the desert. 
 The gunslinger stood up, brushing his hands. 
No other trace; the wind, razor-sharp, had of course filed away even what scant tracks the hardpan might once have held. 

No man-scat, no cast-off trash, never a sign of where those things
might have been buried. 
 Nothing. 
 Only these cold campfires
along the ancient highway moving southeast and the relentless
range-finder in his own head. 
 Although of course it was more
than that; the pull southeast was more than just a sense of direction, was even more than magnetism. 
He sat down and allowed himself a short pull from the waterbag. 
 He thought of that momentary dizziness earlier in the day,
that sense of being almost untethered from the world, and wondered what it might have meant. 
 Why should that dizziness make
him think of his horn and the last of his old friends, both lost 
so long ago at Jericho Hill? 
 He still had the guns-his father's
guns-and surely they were more important than horns. 
. 
. 
 or
even friends. 
Weren't they? 

The question was oddly troubling, but since there seemed to be no answer but the obvious one, he put it aside, possibly for
later consideration. 
 He scanned the desert and then looked up at
the sun, which was now sliding into a far quadrant of the sky that
was, disturbingly, not quite true west. 
 He got up, removed his
threadbare gloves from his belt, and began to pull devil-grass for
his own fire, which he laid over the ashes the man in black had
left. 
 He found the irony, like his thirst, bitterly appealing. 
He did not take the flint and steel from his purse until the remains of the day were only fugitive heat in the ground beneath
him and a sardonic orange line on the monochrome horizon. 
 He
sat with his gunna drawn across his lap and watched the southeast

patiently, looking toward the mountains, not hoping to see the thin straight line of smoke from a new campfire, not expecting to
see an orange spark of flame, but watching anyway because
watching was a part of it, and had its own bitter satisfaction. 
 You will not see what you do not look for, maggot,Cort would have said. 
 Open the gobs the gods gave ya, will ya not? 
But there was nothing. 
 He was close, but only relatively so. 
Not close enough to see smoke at dusk, or the orange wink of a
campfire. 
He laid the flint down the steel rod and struck his spark to thedry, shredded grass, muttering the old and powerful nonsense
words as he did: "Spark-a-dark, where's my sire? 
 Will I lay me? 

Will I stay me? 
 Bless this camp with fire. 
" It was strange how
some of childhood's words and ways fell at the wayside and were
left behind, while others clamped tight and rode for life, growing
the heavier to carry as time passed. 
He lay down upwind of his little blazon, letting the dream-smoke blow out toward the waste. 
 The wind, except for occasional gyrating dust-devils, was constant. 
Above, the stars were unwinking, also constant. 
 Suns and worlds by the million. 
 Dizzying constellations, cold fire in every
primary hue. 
 As he watched, the sky washed from violet to ebony. 

A meteor etched a brief, spectacular arc below Old Mother and
winked out. 
 The fire threw strange shadows as the devil-grass
burned its slow way down into new patterns-not ideograms but
a straightforward crisscross vaguely frightening in its own no-
nonsense surety. 
 He had laid his fuel in a pattern that was not art-
ful but only workable. 
 It spoke of blacks and whites. 
 It spoke of a
man who might straighten bad pictures in strange hotel rooms. 

The fire burned its steady, slow flame, and phantoms danced in its
incandescent core. 
 The gunslinger did not see. 
 The two patterns,

art and craft, were welded together as he slept. 
 The wind moaned,a witch with cancer in her belly. 
 Every now and then a perverse
downdraft would make the smoke whirl and puff toward him and
he breathed some of it in. 
 It built dreams in the same way that a
small irritant may build a pearl in an oyster. 
 The gunslinger occa-
sionally moaned with the wind. 
 The stars were as indifferent to
this as they were to wars, crucifixions, resurrections. 
 This also
would have pleased him. 
IIHe had come down off the last of the foothills leading the mule,
whose eyes were already dead and bulging with the heat. 
 He had
passed the last town three weeks before, and since then there had
only been the deserted coach track and an occasional huddle of
border dwellers'sod dwellings. 
 The huddles had degenerated into
single dwellings, most inhabited by lepers or madmen. 
 He found
the madmen better company. 
 One had given him a stainless steel
Silva compass and bade him give it to the Man Jesus. 
 The gun-
slinger took it gravely. 
 If he saw Him, he would turn over the
compass. 
 He did not expect that he would, but anything was
possible. 
 Once he saw a taheen-this one a man with a raven's
head-but the misbegotten thing fled at his hail, cawing what
might have been words. 
 What might even have been curses. 
Five days had passed since the last hut, and he had begun tosuspect there would be no more when he topped the last eroded
hill and saw the familiar low-backed sod roof. 
The dweller, a surprisingly young man with a wild shock ofstrawberry hair that reached almost to his waist, was weeding a
scrawny stand of corn with zealous abandon. 
 The mule let out a

wheezing grunt and the dweller looked up, glaring blue eyescoming target-center on the gunslinger in a moment. 
 The dweller
was unarmed, with no bolt nor bah the gunslinger could see. 
 He
raised both hands in curt salute to the stranger and then bent to
the corn again, humping up the row next to his hut with back
bent, tossing devil-grass and an occasional stunted corn plant
over his shoulder. 
 His hair flopped and flew in the wind that now
came directly from the desert, with nothing to break it. 
The gunslinger came down the hill slowly, leading the donkeyon which his waterskins sloshed. 
 He paused by the edge of the
lifeless-looking cornpatch, drew a drink from one of his skins to
start the saliva, and spat into the arid soil. 
"Life for your crop. 
"
"Life for your own," the dweller answered and stood up. 
 Hisback popped audibly. 
 He surveyed the gunslinger without fear. 

The little of his face visible between beard and hair seemed un-
marked by the rot, and his eyes, while a bit wild, seemed sane. 

"Long days and pleasant nights, stranger. 
""And may you have twice the number. 
"
"Unlikely," the dweller replied, and voiced a curt laugh. 
 "Idon't have nobbut corn and beans," he said. 
 "Corn's free, but
you'll have to kick something in for the beans. 
 A man brings
them out once in a while. 
 He don't stay long. 
" The dweller
laughed shortly. 
 "Afraid of spirits. 
 Afraid of the bird-man, too. 
""I saw him. 
 The bird-man, I mean. 
 He fled me. 
"
"Yar, he's lost his way. 
 Claims to be looking for a place calledAlgul Siento, only sometimes he calls it Blue Haven or Heaven, I
can't make out which. 
 Has thee heard of it? 
"The gunslinger shook his head. 

"Well . 
. 
. 
 he don't bite and he don't bide, so fuck him. 
 Is theealive or dead? 
"

"Alive," the gunslinger said. 
 "You speak as the Manni do. 
""I was with 'em awhile, but that was no life for me; toochummy, they are, and always looking for holes in the world. 
"This was true, the gunslinger reflected. 
 The Manni-folk weregreat travelers. 
The two of them looked at each other in silence for a mo-ment, and then the dweller put out his hand. 
 "Brown is my name. 
"The gunslinger shook and gave his own name. 
 As he did so, ascrawny raven croaked from the low peak of the sod roof. 
 The
dweller gestured at it briefly: "That's Zoltan. 
"At the sound of its name the raven croaked again and flew across to Brown. 
 It landed on the dweller's head and roosted,
talons firmly twined in the wild thatch of hair. 
"Screw you," Zoltan croaked brightly. 
 "Screw you and thehorse you rode in on. 
"The gunslinger nodded amiably. 

"Beans, beans, the musical fruit," the raven recited, inspired. 
"The more you eat, the more you toot. 
""You teach him that? 
"
"That's all he wants to learn, I guess," Brown said. 
 "Tried to teach him The Lord's Prayer once. 
" His eyes traveled out be-
yond the hut for a moment, toward the gritty, featureless hardpan. 

"Guess this ain't Lord's Prayer country. 
 You're a gunslinger. 
 That
right? 
""Yes. 
" He hunkered down and brought out his makings. 
Zoltan launched himself from Brown's head and landed, flitter-
ing, on the gunslinger's shoulder. 
"Thought your kind was gone. 
"
"Then you see different, don't you? 
"
"Did'ee come from In-World? 
"
"Long ago," the gunslinger agreed. 

"Anything left there? 
"To this the gunslinger made no reply, but his face suggestedthis was a topic better not pursued. 
"After the other one, I guess. 
"
"Yes. 
" The inevitable question followed: "How long since hepassed by? 
"Brown shrugged. 
 "I don't know. 
 Time's funny out here. 
 Dis-tance and direction, too. 
 More than two weeks. 
 Less than two
months. 
 The bean man's been twice since he passed. 
 I'd guess six
weeks. 
 That's probably wrong. 
""The more you eat, the more you toot," Zoltan said. 

"Did he lay by? 
" the gunslinger asked. 

Brown nodded. 
 "He stayed supper, same as you will, I guess. 
We passed the time. 
"The gunslinger stood up and the bird flew back to the roof,squawking. 
 He felt an odd, trembling eagerness. 
 "What did he
talk about? 
"Brown cocked an eyebrow at him. 
 "Not much. 
 Did it everrain and when did I come here and had I buried my wife. 
 He
asked was she of the Manni-folk and I said yar, because it seemed
like he already knew. 
 I did most of the talking, which ain't usual. 
"
He paused, and the only sound was the stark wind. 
 "He's a sor-
cerer, ain't he? 
""Among other things. 
"
Brown nodded slowly. 
 "I knew. 
 He dropped a rabbit out of his sleeve, all gutted and ready for the pot. 
 Are you? 
""A sorcerer? 
" He laughed. 
 "I'm just a man. 
"
"You'll never catch him. 
"
"I'll catch him. 
"
They looked at each other, a sudden depth of feeling betweenthem, the dweller upon his dust-puff-dry ground, the gunslinger

on the hardpan that shelved down to the desert. 
 He reached forhis flint. 
"Here. 
" Brown produced a sulfur-headed match and struck itwith a grimed nail. 
 The gunslinger pushed the tip of his smoke
into the flame and drew. 
"Thanks. 
"
"You'll want to fill your skins," the dweller said, turning away. 
"Spring's under the eaves in back. 
 I'll start dinner. 
"The gunslinger stepped gingerly over the rows of corn andwent around back. 
 The spring was at the bottom of a hand-dug
well, lined with stones to keep the powdery earth from caving. 
 As
he descended the rickety ladder, the gunslinger reflected that the
stones must represent two years'work easily-hauling, dragging,
laying. 
 The water was clear but slow-moving, and filling the skins
was a long chore. 
 While he was topping the second, Zoltan
perched on the lip of the well. 
"Screw you and the horse you rode in on," he advised. 

The gunslinger looked up, startled. 
 The shaft was about fif-teen feet deep: easy enough for Brown to drop a rock on him,
break his head, and steal everything on him. 
 A crazy or a rotter
wouldn't do it; Brown was neither. 
 Yet he liked Brown, and so he
pushed the thought out of his mind and got the rest of the water
God had willed. 
 Whatever else God willed was ka's business, 
not his. 
When he came through the hut's door and walked down thesteps (the hovel proper was set below ground level, designed to
catch and hold the coolness of the nights), Brown was poking
ears of corn into the embers of a tiny fire with a crude hardwood
spatula. 
 Two ragged plates had been set at opposite ends of a dun
blanket. 
 Water for the beans was just beginning to bubble in a pot
hung over the fire. 


"I'll pay for the water, too. 
"Brown did not look up. 
 "The water's a gift from God, as Ithink thee knows. 
 Pappa Doc brings the beans. 
"The gunslinger grunted a laugh and sat down with his backagainst one rude wall, folded his arms, and closed his eyes. 
 After
a little, the smell of roasting corn came to his nose. 
 There was a
pebbly rattle as Brown dumped a paper of dry beans into the pot. 

An occasional tak-tak-takas Zoltan walked restlessly on the roof. 
He was tired; he had been going sixteen and sometimes eighteen
hours a day between here and the horror that had occurred in Tull,
the last village. 
 And he had been afoot for the last twelve days;
the mule was at the end of its endurance, only living because it
was a habit. 
 Once he had known a boy named Sheemie who'd had
a mule. 
 Sheemie was gone now; they were all gone now and there
was only the two of them: him, and the man in black. 
 He had
heard rumor of other lands beyond this, green lands in a place
called Mid-World, but it was hard to believe. 
 Out here, green
lands seemed like a child's fantasy. 
Tak-tak-tak. 

Two weeks, Brown had said, or as many as six. 
 Didn't matter. 
There had been calendars in Tull, and they had remembered the
man in black because of the old man he had healed on his way
through. 
 Just an old man dying of the weed. 
 An old man of thirty-
five. 
 And if Brown was right, he had closed a good deal of dis-
tance on the man in black since then. 
 But the desert was next. 

And the desert would be hell. 
Tak-tak-tak . 
. 
. 

Lend me your wings, bird. 
 I'll spread them and fly on thethermals. 
He slept. 

Brown woke him up an hour later. 
 It was dark. 
 The only light wasthe dull cherry glare of the banked embers. 
"Your mule has passed on," Brown said. 
 "Tell ya sorry. 
 Din-ner's ready. 
""How? 
"
Brown shrugged. 
 "Roasted and boiled, how else? 
 You picky? 
"
"No, the mule. 
"
"It just laid over, that's all. 
 It looked like an old mule. 
" Andwith a touch of apology: "Zoltan et the eyes. 
""Oh. 
" He might have expected it. 
 "All right. 
"
Brown surprised him again when they sat down to the blanketthat served as a table by asking a brief blessing: Rain, health, ex-
pansion to the spirit. 
"Do you believe in an afterlife? 
" the gunslinger asked him asBrown dropped three ears of hot corn onto his plate. 
Brown nodded. 
 "I think this is it. 
"IVThe beans were like bullets, the corn tough. 
 Outside, the prevail-
ing wind snuffled and whined around the ground-level eaves. 
 The
gunslinger ate quickly, ravenously, drinking four cups of water
with the meal. 
 Halfway through, there was a machine-gun rap-
ping at the door. 
 Brown got up and let Zoltan in. 
 The bird flew
across the room and hunched moodily in the corner. 
"Musical fruit," he muttered. 

"You ever think about eating him? 
" the gunslinger asked. 

The dweller laughed. 
"Animals that talk be tough," he said. 


"Birds, billy-bumblers, human beans. 
They be tough eatin'. 
"After dinner, the gunslinger offered his tobacco. 
 The dweller,Brown, accepted eagerly. 
Now,the gunslinger thought. 
 Now the questions will come. 
But Brown asked no questions. 
 He smoked tobacco that hadbeen grown in Garlan years before and looked at the dying em-bers of the fire. 
 It was already noticeably cooler in the hovel. 
"Lead us not into temptation," Zoltan said suddenly, apoca-lyptically. 
The gunslinger started as if he had been shot at. 
 He wassuddenly sure all this was an illusion, that the man in black had
spun a spell and was trying to tell him something in a madden-
ingly obtuse, symbolic way. 
"Do you know Tull? 
" he asked suddenly. 

Brown nodded. 
 "Came through it to get here, went back onceto sell corn and drink a glass of whiskey. 
 It rained that year. 

Lasted maybe fifteen minutes. 
 The ground just seemed to open
and suck it up. 
 An hour later it was just as white and dry as ever. 

But the corn-God, the corn. 
 You could see it grow. 
 That wasn't
so bad. 
 But you could hearit, as if the rain had given it a mouth. 
It wasn't a happy sound. 
 It seemed to be sighing and groaning its
way out of the earth. 
" He paused. 
 "I had extra, so I took it and
sold it. 
 Pappa Doc said he'd do it, but he would have cheated me. 

So I went. 
""You don't like town? 
"
"No. 
"
"I almost got killed there," the gunslinger said. 

"Do you say so? 
"
"Set my watch and warrant on it. 
 And I killed a man that wastouched by God," the gunslinger said. 
 "Only it wasn't God. 
 It was
the man with the rabbit up his sleeve. 
 The man in black. 
"

"He laid you a trap. 
""You say true, I say thank ya. 
"
They looked at each other across the shadows, the momenttaking on overtones of finality. 
Now the questions will come. 
But Brown still had no questions to ask. 
 His cigarette wasdown to a smoldering roach, but when the gunslinger tapped his
poke, Brown shook his head. 
Zoltan shifted restlessly, seemed about to speak, subsided. 

"Will I tell you about it? 
" the gunslinger asked. 
 "OrdinarilyI'm not much of a talker, but . 
. 
. 
""Sometimes talking helps. 
 I'll listen. 
"
The gunslinger searched for words to begin and found none. 
"I have to pass water," he said. 
Brown nodded. 
 "Pass it in the corn, please. 
"
"Sure. 
"
He went up the stairs and out into the dark. 
 The stars glitteredoverhead. 
 The wind pulsed. 
 His urine arched out over the pow-
dery cornfield in a wavering stream. 
 The man in black had drawn
him here. 
 It wasn't beyond possibility that Brown wasthe man inblack. 
 He might be . 
. 
. 
The gunslinger shut these useless and upsetting thoughtsaway. 
 The only contingency he had not learned how to bear was
the possibility of his own madness. 
 He went back inside. 
"Have you decided if I'm an enchantment yet? 
" Brown asked,amused. 
The gunslinger paused on the tiny landing, startled. 
 Then he came down slowly and sat. 
 "The thought crossed my mind. 

Are you? 
""If I am, I don't know it. 
"
This wasn't a terribly helpful answer, but the gunslinger de-cided to let it pass. 
 "I started to tell you about Tull. 
"

"Is it growing? 
""It's dead," the gunslinger said. 
 "I killed it. 
" He thought ofadding: And now I'm going to kill you, if for no other reason thanI don't want to have to sleep with one eye open. 
But had he cometo such behavior? 
 If so, why bother to go on at all? 
 Why, if he had
become what he pursued? 
Brown said, "I don't want nothing from you, gunslinger, ex-cept to still be here when you move on. 
 I won't beg for my life,
but that don't mean I don't want it yet awhile longer. 
"The gunslinger closed his eyes. 
 His mind whirled. 

"Tell me what you are," he said thickly. 

"Just a man. 
 One who means you no harm. 
 And I'm still will-ing to listen if you're willing to talk. 
"To this the gunslinger made no reply. 

"I guess you won't feel right about it unless I invite you,"Brown said, "and so I do. 
 Will you tell me about Tull? 
"The gunslinger was surprised to find that this time the wordswere there. 
 He began to speak in flat bursts that slowly spread
into an even, slightly toneless narrative. 
 He found himself oddly
excited. 
 He talked deep into the night. 
 Brown did not interrupt at
all. 
 Neither did the bird. 
VHe'd bought the mule in Pricetown, and when he reached Tull, it
was still fresh. 
 The sun had set an hour earlier, but the gunslinger
had continued traveling, guided by the town glow in the sky, then
by the uncannily clear notes of a honky-tonk piano playing "Hey
Jude. 
" The road widened as it took on tributaries. 
 Here and there
were overhead sparklights, all of them long dead. 
The forests were long gone now, replaced by the monotonous

flat prairie country: endless, desolate fields gone to timothy andlow shrubs; eerie, deserted estates guarded by brooding, shad-
owed mansions where demons undeniably walked; leering, empty
shanties where the people had either moved on or had been
moved along; an occasional dweller's hovel, given away by a sin-
gle flickering point of light in the dark, or by sullen, inbred clan-
fams toiling silently in the fields by day. 
 Corn was the main crop,
but there were beans and also some pokeberries. 
 An occasional
scrawny cow stared at him lumpishly from between peeled alder
poles. 
 Coaches had passed him four times, twice coming and
twice going, nearly empty as they came up on him from behind
and bypassed him and his mule, fuller as they headed back
toward the forests of the north. 
 Now and then a farmer passed
with his feet up on the splashboard of his bucka, careful not to
look at the man with the guns. 
It was ugly country. 
 It had showered twice since he had leftPricetown, grudgingly both times. 
 Even the timothy looked yel-
low and dispirited. 
 Pass-on-by country. 
 He had seen no sign of
the man in black. 
 Perhaps he had taken a coach. 
The road made a bend, and beyond it the gunslinger cluckedthe mule to a stop and looked down at Tull. 
 It was at the floor of a
circular, bowl-shaped hollow, a shoddy jewel in a cheap setting. 

There were a number of lights, most of them clustered around the
area of the music. 
 There looked to be four streets, three running
at right angles to the coach road, which was the main avenue of
the town. 
 Perhaps there would be a cafe. 
 He doubted it, but per-
haps. 
 He clucked at the mule. 
More houses sporadically lined the road now, most of themstill deserted. 
 He passed a tiny graveyard with moldy, leaning
wooden slabs overgrown and choked by the rank devil-grass. 
 Per-
haps five hundred feet further on he passed a chewed sign which
said: TULL. 


The paint was flaked almost to the point of illegibility. 
 Therewas another further on, but the gunslinger was not able to readthat one at all. 
A fool's chorus of half-stoned voices was rising in the finalprotracted lyric of "Hey Jude"-"Naa-naa-naa naa-na-na-na . 
. 
. 

hey, Jude . 
. 
. 
"-as he entered the town proper. 
 It was a dead
sound, like the wind in the hollow of a rotted tree. 
 Only the pro-
saic thump and pound of the honky-tonk piano saved him from
seriously wondering if the man in black might not have raised
ghosts to inhabit a deserted town. 
 He smiled a little at the
thought. 
There were people on the streets, but not many. 
 Three ladieswearing black slacks and identical high-collared blouses passed
by on the opposite boardwalk, not looking at him with pointed
curiosity. 
 Their faces seemed to swim above their all-but-invisible
bodies like pallid balls with eyes. 
 A solemn old man with a straw
hat perched firmly on top of his head watched him from the steps
of a boarded-up mercantile store. 
 A scrawny tailor with a late
customer paused to watch him go by; he held up the lamp in his
window for a better look. 
 The gunslinger nodded. 
 Neither the tai-
lor nor his customer nodded back. 
 He could feel their eyes resting
heavily upon the low-slung holsters that lay against his hips. 
 A
young boy, perhaps thirteen, and a girl who might have been his
sissa or his jilly-child crossed the street a block up, pausing im-
perceptibly. 
 Their footfalls raised little hanging clouds of dust. 

Here in town most of the streetside lamps worked, but they
weren't electric; their isinglass sides were cloudy with congealed
oil. 
 Some had been crashed out. 
 There was a livery with a just-
hanging-on look to it, probably depending on the coach line for
its survival. 
 Three boys were crouched silently around a marble
ring drawn in the dust to one side of the barn's gaping maw,
smoking cornshuck cigarettes. 
 They made long shadows in the

yard. 
 One had a scorpion's tail poked in the band of his hat. 
 An-other had a bloated left eye bulging sightlessly from its socket. 
The gunslinger led his mule past them and looked into thedim depths of the barn. 
 One lamp glowed sunkenly. 
 A shadow
jumped and flickered as a gangling old man in bib overalls forked
loose timothy hay into the hayloft with big, grunting swipes of his
fork. 
"Hey! 
" the gunslinger called. 

The fork faltered and the hostler looked around with yellow-tinged eyes. 
 "Hey yourself! 
""I got a mule here. 
"
"Good for you. 
"
The gunslinger flicked a heavy, unevenly milled gold pieceinto the semidark. 
 It rang on the old, chaff-drifted boards and
glittered. 
The hostler came forward, bent, picked it up, squinted at thegunslinger. 
 His eyes dropped to the gunbelts and he nodded
sourly. 
 "How long you want him put up? 
""A night or two. 
 Maybe longer. 
"
"I ain't got no change for gold. 
"
"Didn't ask for any. 
"
"Shoot-up money," the hostler muttered. 

"What did you say? 
"
"Nothing. 
" The hostler caught the mule's bridle and led himinside. 
"Rub him down! 
" the gunslinger called. 
 "I expect to smell iton him when I come back, hear me well! 
"The old man did not turn. 
 The gunslinger walked out to theboys crouched around the marble ring. 
 They had watched the en-
tire exchange with contemptuous interest. 
"Long days and pleasant nights," the gunslinger offeredconversationally. 


No answer. 
"You fellas live in town? 
"
No answer, unless the scorpion's tail gave one: it seemed to nod. 
One of the boys removed a crazily tilted twist of cornshuckfrom his mouth, grasped a green cat's-eye marble, and squirted it
into the dirt circle. 
 It struck a croaker and knocked it outside. 
 He
picked up the cat's-eye and prepared to shoot again. 
"There a cafe in this town? 
" the gunslinger asked. 

One of them looked up, the youngest. 
 There was a huge cold-sore at the corner of his mouth, but his eyes were both the same
size, and full of an innocence that wouldn't last long in this shit-
hole. 
 He looked at the gunslinger with hooded brimming wonder
that was touching and frightening. 
"Might get a burger at Sheb's. 
"
"That the honky-tonk? 
"
The boy nodded. 
 "Yar. 
" The eyes of his mates had turned ugly and hostile. 
 He would probably pay for having spoken up in
kindness. 
The gunslinger touched the brim of his hat. 
 "I'm grateful. 
 It'sgood to know someone in this town is bright enough to talk. 
"He walked past, mounted the boardwalk, and started downtoward Sheb's, hearing the clear, contemptuous voice of one of
the others, hardly more than a childish treble: "Weed-eater! 
 How
long you been screwin'your sister, Charlie? 
 Weed-eater! 
" Then
the sound of a blow and a cry. 
There were three flaring kerosene lamps in front of Sheb's,one to each side and one nailed above the drunk-hung batwing
doors. 
 The chorus of "Hey Jude" had petered out, and the piano
was plinking some other old ballad. 
 Voices murmured like broken
threads. 
 The gunslinger paused outside for a moment, looking in. 

Sawdust floor, spittoons by the tipsy-legged tables. 
 A plank bar

on sawhorses. 
 A gummy mirror behind it, reflecting the pianoplayer, who wore an inevitable piano-stool slouch. 
 The front of
the piano had been removed so you could watch the wooden keys
whonk up and down as the contraption was played. 
 The bartender
was a straw-haired woman wearing a dirty blue dress. 
 One strap
was held with a safety pin. 
 There were perhaps six townies in the
back of the room, juicing and playing Watch Me apathetically. 

Another half-dozen were grouped loosely about the piano. 
 Four
or five at the bar. 
 And an old man with wild gray hair collapsed at
a table by the doors. 
 The gunslinger went in. 
Heads swiveled to look at him and his guns. 
 There was a mo-ment of near silence, except for the oblivious piano player, who
continued to tinkle. 
 Then the woman mopped at the bar, and
things shifted back. 
"Watch me," one of the players in the corner said and matchedthree hearts with four spades, emptying his hand. 
 The one with
the hearts swore, pushed over his stake, and the next hand was
dealt. 
The gunslinger approached the woman at the bar. 
 "You gotmeat? 
" he asked. 
"Sure. 
" She looked him in the eye, and she might have beenpretty when she started out, but the world had moved on since
then. 
 Now her face was lumpy and there a livid scar went cork-
screwing across her forehead. 
 She had powdered it heavily, and
the powder called attention to what it had been meant to camouflage. 
 "Clean beef. 
 Threaded stock. 
 It's dear, though. 
"Threaded stock, my ass,the gunslinger thought. 
 What you gotin your cooler came from something with three eyes, six legs, or
both-that's my guess, lady-sai. 
"I want three burgers and a beer, would it please ya. 
"
Again that subtle shift in tone. 
 Three hamburgers. 
 Mouths

watered and tongues licked at saliva with slow lust. 
 Three ham-burgers. 
 Had anyone here ever seen anyone eat three hamburgers
at a go? 
"That would go you five bocks. 
 Do you ken bocks? 
"
"Dollars? 
"
She nodded, so she was probably saying bucks. 
That was hisguess, anyway. 
"That with the beer? 
" he asked, smiling a little. 
 "Or is thebeer extra? 
"She didn't return the smile. 
 "I'll throw in the suds. 
 Once I seethe color of your money, that is. 
"The gunslinger put a gold piece on the bar, and every eye fol-lowed it. 
There was a smoldering charcoal cooker behind the bar andto the left of the mirror. 
 The woman disappeared into a small
room behind it and returned with meat on a paper. 
 She scrimped
out three patties and put them on the grill. 
 The smell that arose
was maddening. 
 The gunslinger stood with stolid indifference,
only peripherally aware of the faltering piano, the slowing of the
card game, the sidelong glances of the barflies. 
The man was halfway up behind him when the gunslingersaw him in the mirror. 
 The man was almost completely bald, and
his hand was wrapped around the haft of a gigantic hunting knife
that was looped onto his belt like a holster. 
"Go sit down," the gunslinger said. 
 "Do yourself a favor,cully. 
"The man stopped. 
 His upper lip lifted unconsciously, like adog's, and there was a moment of silence. 
 Then he went back to
his table, and the atmosphere shifted back again. 
Beer came in a cracked glass schooner. 
 "I ain't got change forgold," the woman said truculently. 


"Don't expect any. 
"She nodded angrily, as if this show of wealth, even at herbenefit, incensed her. 
 But she took his gold, and a moment later
the hamburgers came on a cloudy plate, still red around the
edges. 
"Do you have salt? 
"
She gave it to him in a little crock she took from underneaththe bar, white lumps he'd have to crumble with his fingers. 

"Bread? 
""No bread. 
" He knew she was lying, but he also knew whyand didn't push it. 
 The bald man was staring at him with cya-
nosed eyes, his hands clenching and unclenching on the splin-
tered and gouged surface of his table. 
 His nostrils flared with
pulsating regularity, scooping up the smell of the meat. 
 That, at
least, was free. 
The gunslinger began to eat steadily, not seeming to taste,merely chopping the meat apart and forking it into his mouth, try-
ing not to think of what the cow this had come from must have
looked like. 
 Threaded stock, she had said. 
 Yes, quite likely! 
 And
pigs would dance the commala in the light of the Peddler's Moon. 
He was almost through, ready to call for another beer and rolla smoke, when the hand fell on his shoulder. 
He suddenly became aware that the room had once moregone silent, and he tasted tension in the air. 
 He turned around and
stared into the face of the man who had been asleep by the door
when he entered. 
 It was a terrible face. 
 The odor of the devil-
grass was a rank miasma. 
 The eyes were damned, the staring,
glaring eyes of one who sees but does not see, eyes ever turned
inward to the sterile hell of dreams beyond control, dreams un-
leashed, risen out of the stinking swamps of the unconscious. 
The woman behind the bar made a small moaning sound. 

The cracked lips writhed, lifted, revealing the green, mossy

teeth, and the gunslinger thought: He's not even smoking it any-more. 
 He's chewing it. 
 He's reallychewing it. 
And on the heels of that: He's a dead man. 
 He should havebeen dead a year ago. 
And on the heels of that: The man in black did this. 
They stared at each other, the gunslinger and the man whohad gone around the rim of madness. 
He spoke, and the gunslinger, dumbfounded, heard himselfaddressed in the High Speech of Gilead. 
"The gold for a favor, gunslinger-sai. 
 Just one? 
 For a pretty. 
"The High Speech. 
 For a moment his mind refused to track it. 
It had been years-God! 
-centuries, millenniums; there was no
more High Speech; he was the last, the last gunslinger. 
 The others
were all . 
. 
. 
Numbed, he reached into his breast pocket and produced agold piece. 
 The split, scabbed, gangrenous hand reached for it,
fondled it, held it up to reflect the greasy glare of the kerosene
lamps. 
 It threw off its proud civilized glow; golden, reddish,
bloody. 
"Ahhhhhh . 
. 
. 
"An inarticulate sound of pleasure. 
 The oldman did a weaving turn and began moving back to his table, hold-
ing the coin at eye level, turning it, flashing it. 
The room was emptying rapidly, the batwings shuttlingmadly back and forth. 
 The piano player closed the lid of his in-
strument with a bang and exited after the others in long, comic-
opera strides. 
"Sheb! 
" the woman screamed after him, her voice an oddmixture of fear and shrewishness, "Sheb, you come back here! 

Goddammit! 
" Was that a name the gunslinger had heard before? 

He thought yes, but there was no time to reflect upon it now, or to
cast his mind back. 
The old man, meanwhile, had gone back to his table. 
 He spun

the gold piece on the gouged wood, and the dead-alive eyes fol-lowed it with empty fascination. 
 He spun it a second time, a third,
and his eyelids drooped. 
 The fourth time, and his head settled to
the wood before the coin stopped. 
"There," she said softly, furiously. 
 "You've driven out mytrade. 
 Are you satisfied? 
""They'll be back," the gunslinger said. 

"Not tonight they won't. 
"
"Who is he? 
" He gestured at the weed-eater. 

"Go fuck yourself. 
 Sai. 
""I have to know," the gunslinger said patiently. 
 "He-"
"He talked to you funny," she said. 
 "Nort never talked likethat in his life. 
""I'm looking for a man. 
 You would know him. 
"
She stared at him, the anger dying. 
 It was replaced withspeculation, then with a high, wet gleam he had seen before. 
 The
rickety building ticked thoughtfully to itself. 
 A dog barked bray-
ingly, far away. 
 The gunslinger waited. 
 She saw his knowledge
and the gleam was replaced by hopelessness, by a dumb need that
had no mouth. 
"I guess maybe you know my price," she said. 
 "I got an itch Iused to be able to take care of, but now I can't. 
"He looked at her steadily. 
 The scar would not show in thedark. 
 Her body was lean enough so the desert and grit and grind
hadn't been able to sag everything. 
 And she'd once been pretty,
maybe even beautiful. 
 Not that it mattered. 
 It would not have mat-
tered if the grave-beetles had nested in the arid blackness of her
womb. 
 It had all been written. 
 Somewhere some hand had put it
all down in ka's book. 
Her hands came up to her face and there was still some juiceleft in her-enough to weep. 


"Don't look! 
You don't have to look at me so mean! 
""I'm sorry," the gunslinger said. 
 "I didn't mean to be mean. 
""None of you mean it! 
" she cried at him. 

"Close the place up and put out the lights. 
"
She wept, hands at her face. 
 He was glad she had her hands ather face. 
 Not because of the scar but because it gave her back her
maidenhood, if not her maidenhead. 
 The pin that held the strap of
her dress glittered in the greasy light. 
"Will he steal anything? 
 I'll put him out if he will. 
"
"No," she whispered. 
 "Nort don't steal. 
"
"Then put out the lights. 
"
She would not remove her hands until she was behind himand she doused the lamps one by one, turning down the wicks
and breathing the flames into extinction. 
 Then she took his hand
in the dark and it was warm. 
 She led him upstairs. 
 There was no
light to hide their act. 
VIHe made cigarettes in the dark, then lit them and passed one to
her. 
 The room held her scent, fresh lilac, pathetic. 
 The smell of
the desert had overlaid it. 
 He realized he was afraid of the desert
ahead. 
"His name is Nort," she said. 
 No harshness had been wornout of her voice. 
 "Just Nort. 
 He died. 
"The gunslinger waited. 

"He was touched by God. 
"
The gunslinger said, "I have never seen Him. 
"
"He was here ever since I can remember-Nort, I mean, notGod. 
" She laughed jaggedly into the dark. 
 "He had a honey-

wagon for a while. 
 Started to drink. 
 Started to smell the grass. 
Then to smoke it. 
 The kids started to follow him around and sic
their dogs onto him. 
 He wore old green pants that stank. 
 Do you
understand? 
""Yes. 
"
"He started to chew it. 
 At the last he just sat in there anddidn't eat anything. 
 He might have been a king, in his mind. 
 The
children might have been his jesters, and the dogs his princes. 
""Yes. 
"
"He died right in front of this place," she said. 
 "Came clump-ing down the boardwalk-his boots wouldn't wear out, they were
engineer boots he found in the old trainyard-with the children
and dogs behind him. 
 He looked like wire clothes hangers all
wrapped and twirled together. 
 You could see all the lights of hell
in his eyes, but he was grinning, just like the grins the children
carve into their sharproots and pumpkins, come Reap. 
 You could
smell the dirt and the rot and the weed. 
 It was running down from
the corners of his mouth like green blood. 
 I think he meant to
come in and listen to Sheb play the piano. 
 And right in front, he
stopped and cocked his head. 
 I could see him, and I thought he
heard a coach, although there was none due. 
 Then he puked, and
it was black and full of blood. 
 It went right through that grin like
sewer water through a grate. 
 The stink was enough to make you
want to run mad. 
 He raised up his arms and just threw over. 
 That
was all. 
 He died in his own vomit with that grin on his face. 
""A nice story. 
"
"Oh yes, thankee-sai. 
 This be a nice place. 
"
She was trembling beside him. 
 Outside, the wind kept up itssteady whine, and somewhere far away a door was banging, like a
sound heard in a dream. 
 Mice ran in the walls. 
 The gunslinger
thought in the back of his mind that it was probably the only

place in town prosperous enough to support mice. 
 He put a handon her belly and she started violently, then relaxed. 
"The man in black," he said. 

"You have to have it, don't you? 
 You couldn't just throw me afuck and go to sleep. 
""I have to have it. 
"
"All right. 
 I'll tell you. 
" She grasped his hand in both of hersand told him. 
VIIHe came in the late afternoon of the day Nort died, and the 
wind was whooping it up, pulling away the loose topsoil, sending
sheets of grit and uprooted stalks of corn windmilling past. 
 Jubal
Kennerly had padlocked the livery, and the few other merchants
had shuttered their windows and laid boards across the shutters. 

The sky was the yellow color of old cheese and the clouds flew
across it, as if they had seen something horrifying in the desert
wastes where they had so lately been. 
The gunslinger's quarry came in a rickety rig with a ripplingtarp tied across its bed. 
 There was a big howdy-do of a grin on his
face. 
 They watched him come, and old man Kennerly, lying by
the window with a bottle in one hand and the loose, hot flesh of
his second-eldest daughter's left breast in the other, resolved not
to be there if he should knock. 
But the man in black went by without slowing the bay thatpulled his rig, and the spinning wheels spumed up dust that the
wind clutched eagerly. 
 He might have been a priest or a monk; he
wore a black robe that had been floured with dust, and a loose
hood covered his head and obscured his features, but not that horrid happy grin. 
 The robe rippled and flapped. 
 From beneath thegarment's hem there peeped heavy buckled boots with square
toes. 
He pulled up in front of Sheb's and tethered the horse, whichlowered its head and grunted at the ground. 
 Around the back of
the rig he untied one flap, found a weathered saddlebag, threw it
over his shoulder, and went in through the batwings. 
Alice watched him curiously, but no one else noticed his ar-rival. 
 The regulars were drunk as lords. 
 Sheb was playing Metho-
dist hymns ragtime, and the grizzled layabouts who had come in
early to avoid the storm and to attend Nort's wake had sung them-
selves hoarse. 
 Sheb, drunk nearly to the point of senselessness,
intoxicated and horny with his own continued existence, played
with hectic, shuttlecock speed, fingers flying like looms. 
Voices screeched and hollered, never overcoming the windbut sometimes seeming to challenge it. 
 In the corner, Zachary
had thrown Amy Feldon's skirts over her head and was paint-
ing Reap-charms on her knees. 
 A few other women circulated. 
 A
fever seemed to be on all of them. 
 The dull stormglow that fil-
tered through the batwings seemed to mock them, however. 
Nort had been laid out on two tables in the center of the room. 
His engineer boots made a mystical V. 
 His mouth hung open in a
slack grin, although someone had closed his eyes and put slugs
on them. 
 His hands had been folded on his chest with a sprig of
devil-grass in them. 
 He smelled like poison. 
The man in black pushed back his hood and came to the bar. 
Alice watched him, feeling trepidation mixed with the familiar
want that hid within her. 
 There was no religious symbol on him,
although that meant nothing by itself. 
"Whiskey," he said. 
 His voice was soft and pleasant. 
 "I wantthe good stuff, honey. 
"

She reached under the counter and brought out a bottle ofStar. 
 She could have palmed off the local popskull on him as herbest, but did not. 
 She poured, and the man in black watched her. 

His eyes were large, luminous. 
 The shadows were too thick to de-
termine their color exactly. 
 Her need intensified. 
 The hollering
and whooping went on behind, unabated. 
 Sheb, the worthless
gelding, was playing about the Christian Soldiers and somebody
had persuaded Aunt Mill to sing. 
 Her voice, warped and dis-
torted, cut through the babble like a dull ax through a calf's brain. 
"Hey, Allie! 
"
She went to serve, resentful of the stranger's silence, resentfulof his no-color eyes and her own restless groin. 
 She was afraid of
her needs. 
 They were capricious and beyond her control. 
 They
might be the signal of change, which would in turn signal the be-
ginning of her old age-a condition which in Tull was usually as
short and bitter as a winter sunset. 
She drew beer until the keg was empty, then broached an-other. 
 She knew better than to ask Sheb; he would come willingly
enough, like the dog he was, and would either chop off his own
fingers or spume beer all over everything. 
 The stranger's eyes
were on her as she went about it; she could feel them. 
"It's busy," he said when she returned. 
 He had not touched hisdrink, merely rolled it between his palms to warm it. 
"Wake," she said. 

"I noticed the departed. 
"
"They're bums," she said with sudden hatred. 
 "All bums. 
"
"It excites them. 
 He's dead. 
 They're not. 
"
"He was their butt when he was alive. 
 It's not right that heshould be their butt now. 
 It's . 
. 
. 
" She trailed off, not able to ex-
press what it was, or how it was obscene. 
"Weed-eater? 
"

"Yes! 
 What else did he have? 
"Her tone was accusing, but he did not drop his eyes, and shefelt the blood rush to her face. 
 "I'm sorry. 
 Are you a priest? 
 This
must revolt you. 
""I'm not and it doesn't. 
" He knocked the whiskey back neatlyand did not grimace. 
 "Once more, please. 
 Once more with feel-
ing, as they say in the world next door. 
"She had no idea what that might mean, and was afraid to ask. 
"I'll have to see the color of your coin first. 
 I'm sorry. 
""No need to be. 
"
He put a rough silver coin on the counter, thick on one edge,thin on the other, and she said as she would say later: "I don't
have change for this. 
"He shook his head, dismissing it, and watched absently as shepoured again. 
"Are you only passing through? 
" she asked. 

He did not reply for a long time, and she was about to repeatwhen he shook his head impatiently. 
 "Don't talk trivialities. 

You're here with death. 
"She recoiled, hurt and amazed, her first thought being that hehad lied about his holiness to test her. 
"You cared for him," he said flatly. 
 "Isn't that true? 
"
"Who? 
 Nort? 
" She laughed, affecting annoyance to cover herconfusion. 
 "I think you better-""You're soft-hearted and a little afraid," he went on, "and hewas on the weed, looking out hell's back door. 
 And there he is,
they've even slammed the door now, and you don't think they'll
open it until it's time for you to walk through, isn't it so? 
""What are you, drunk? 
"
"Mistuh Norton, he daid," the man in black intoned, givingthe words a sardonic little twist. 
 "Dead as anybody. 
 Dead as you
or anybody. 
"

"Get out of my place. 
" She felt a trembling loathing spring upin her, but the warmth still radiated from her belly. 
"It's all right," he said softly. 
 "It's all right. 
 Wait. 
 Just wait. 
"The eyes were blue. 
 She felt suddenly easy in her mind, as ifshe had taken a drug. 
"Dead as anybody," he said. 
 "Do you see? 
"
She nodded dumbly and he laughed aloud-a fine, strong,untainted laugh that swung heads around. 
 He whirled and faced
them, suddenly the center of attention. 
 Aunt Mill faltered and
subsided, leaving a cracked high note bleeding on the air. 
 Sheb
struck a discord and halted. 
 They looked at the stranger uneasily. 

Sand rattled against the sides of the building. 
The silence held, spun itself out. 
 Her breath had clogged inher throat and she looked down and saw both hands pressed to
her belly beneath the bar. 
 They all looked at him and he looked at
them. 
 Then the laugh burst forth again, strong, rich, beyond de-
nial. 
 But there was no urge to laugh along with him. 
"I'll show you a wonder! 
" he cried at them. 
 But they onlywatched him, like obedient children taken to see a magician in
whom they have grown too old to believe. 
The man in black sprang forward, and Aunt Mill drew awayfrom him. 
 He grinned fiercely and slapped her broad belly. 
 A
short, unwitting cackle was forced out of her, and the man in
black threw back his head. 
"It's better, isn't it? 
"
Aunt Mill cackled again, suddenly broke into sobs, and fledblindly through the doors. 
 The others watched her go silently. 
 The
storm was beginning; shadows followed each other, rising and
falling on the white cyclorama of the sky. 
 A man near the piano
with a forgotten beer in one hand made a groaning, slobbering
sound. 
The man in black stood over Nort, grinning down at him. 
 The

wind howled and shrieked and thrummed. 
 Something largestruck the side of the building hard enough to make it shake and
then bounced away. 
 One of the men at the bar tore himself free
and headed for some quieter locale, moving in great grotesque
strides. 
 Thunder racketed the sky with a sound like some god
coughing. 
"All right! 
" the man in black grinned. 
 "All right, let's getdown toit! 
"He began to spit into Nort's face, aiming carefully. 
 The spittlegleamed on the corpse's forehead, pearled down the shaven beak
of his nose. 
Under the bar, her hands worked faster. 

Sheb laughed, loon-like, and hunched over. 
 He began tocough up phlegm, huge and sticky gobs of it, and let fly. 
 The man
in black roared approval and pounded him on the back. 
 Sheb
grinned, one gold tooth twinkling. 
Some fled. 
 Others gathered in a loose ring around Nort. 
 Hisface and the dewlapped rooster-wrinkles of his neck and upper
chest gleamed with liquid-liquid so precious in this dry country. 

And suddenly the rain of spit stopped, as if on signal. 
 There was
ragged, heavy breathing. 
The man in black suddenly lunged across the body, jackknif-ing over it in a smooth arc. 
 It was pretty, like a flash of water. 
 He
caught himself on his hands, sprang to his feet in a twist, grinning,
and went over again. 
 One of the watchers forgot himself, began to
applaud, and suddenly backed away, eyes cloudy with terror. 
 He
slobbered a hand across his mouth and made for the door. 
Nort twitched the third time the man in black went across. 

A sound went through the watchers-a grunt-and then theywere silent. 
 The man in black threw his head back and howled. 

His chest moved in a quick, shallow rhythm as he sucked air. 
 He
began to go back and forth at a faster clip, pouring over Nort's

body like water poured from one glass to another and then backagain. 
 The only sound in the room was the tearing rasp of his res-
piration and the rising pulse of the storm. 
There came the moment when Nort drew a deep, dry breath. 
His hands rattled and pounded aimlessly on the table. 
 Sheb
screeched and exited. 
 One of the women followed him, her eyes
wide and her wimple billowing. 
The man in black went across once more, twice, thrice. 
 Thebody on the table was vibrating now, trembling and rapping and
twitching like a large yet essentially lifeless doll with some mon-
strous clockwork hidden inside. 
 The smell of rot and excrement
and decay billowed up in choking waves. 
 There came a moment
when his eyes opened. 
Allie felt her numb and feelingless feet propelling her back-ward. 
 She struck the mirror, making it shiver, and blind panic
took over. 
 She bolted like a steer. 
"So here's your wonder," the man in black called after her,panting. 
 "I've given it to you. 
 Now you can sleep easy. 
 Even thatisn't irreversible. 
 Although it's . 
. 
. 
 so . 
. 
. 
 goddamned . 
. 
. 
 funny! 
"And he began to laugh again. 
 The sound faded as she raced up the
stairs, not stopping until the door to the three rooms above the bar
was bolted. 
She began to giggle then, rocking back and forth on herhaunches by the door. 
 The sound rose to a keening wail that
mixed with the wind. 
 She kept hearing the sound Nort had made
when he came back to life-the sound of fists knocking blindly
on the lid of a coffin. 
 What thoughts, she wondered, could be left
in his reanimated brain? 
 What had he seen while dead? 
 How
much did he remember? 
 Would he tell? 
 Were the secrets of the
grave waiting downstairs? 
 The most terrible thing about such
questions, she reckoned, was that part of you really wanted to ask. 
Below her, Nort wandered absently out into the storm to pull

some weed. 
 The man in black, now the only patron in the bar, per-haps watched him go, perhaps still grinning. 
When she forced herself to go back down that evening, carry-ing a lamp in one hand and a heavy stick of stovewood in the
other, the man in black was gone, rig and all. 
 But Nort was there,
sitting at the table by the door as if he had never been away. 
 The
smell of the weed was on him, but not as heavily as she might
have expected. 
He looked up at her and smiled tentatively. 
 "Hello, Allie. 
"
"Hello, Nort. 
" She put the stovewood down and began light-ing the lamps, not turning her back to him. 
"I been touched by God," he said presently. 
 "I ain't going todie no more. 
 He said so. 
 It was a promise. 
""How nice for you, Nort. 
" The spill she was holding droppedthrough her trembling fingers and she picked it up. 
"I'd like to stop chewing the grass," he said. 
 "I don't enjoy itno more. 
 It don't seem right for a man touched by God to be
chewing the weed. 
""Then why don't you stop? 
"
Her exasperation had startled her into looking at him as aman again, rather than an infernal miracle. 
 What she saw was a
rather sad-looking specimen only half-stoned, looking hangdog
and ashamed. 
 She could not be frightened by him anymore. 
"I shake," he said. 
 "And I want it. 
 I can't stop. 
 Allie, you wasalways good to me . 
. 
. 
" He began to weep. 
 "I can't even stop pee-
ing myself. 
 What am I? 
 What am I? 
"She walked to the table and hesitated there, uncertain. 

"He could have made me not want it," he said through thetears. 
 "He could have done that if he could have made me be
alive. 
 I ain't complaining . 
. 
. 
 I don't want to complain . 
. 
. 
" He
stared around hauntedly and whispered, "He might strike me
dead if I did. 
"

"Maybe it's a joke. 
 He seemed to have quite a sense ofhumor. 
"Nort took his poke from where it dangled inside his shirt andbrought out a handful of grass. 
 Unthinkingly she knocked it awayand then drew her hand back, horrified. 
"I can't help it, Allie, I can't," and he made a crippled dive forthe poke. 
 She could have stopped him, but she made no effort. 

She went back to lighting the lamps, tired although the evening
had barely begun. 
 But nobody came in that night except old man
Kennerly, who had missed everything. 
 He did not seem particu-
larly surprised to see Nort. 
 Perhaps someone had told him what
had happened. 
 He ordered beer, asked where Sheb was, and
pawed her. 
Later, Nort came to her and held out a folded piece of paperin one shaky no-right-to-be-alive hand. 
 "He left you this," he
said. 
 "I near forgot. 
 If I'd forgot, he woulda come back and killed
me, sure. 
"Paper was valuable, a commodity much to be treasured, butshe didn't like to handle this. 
 It felt heavy, nasty. 
 Written on it was
a single word:"How'd he know my name? 
" she asked Nort, and Nort onlyshook his head. 
She opened it and read this:






V%And oh dear God, she knew that she would. 
 Already it trem-bled on her lips. 
 Nineteen,she would say-Nort, listen: Nineteen. 
And the secrets of Death and the land beyond would be opened 
to her. 
Sooner or later you will ask. 

The next day things were almost normal, although none ofthe children followed Nort. 
 The day after that, the catcalls re-
sumed. 
 Life had gotten back on its own sweet keel. 
 The uprooted
corn was gathered together by the children, and a week after
Nort's resurrection, they burned it in the middle of the street. 
 The
fire was momentarily bright and most of the barflies stepped 
or staggered out to watch. 
 They looked primitive. 
 Their faces
seemed to float between the flames and the ice-chip brilliance of
the sky. 
 Allie watched them and felt a pang of fleeting despair for
the sad times of this world. 
 The loss. 
 Things had stretched apart. 

There was no glue at the center anymore. 
 Somewhere something
was tottering, and when it fell, all would end. 
 She had never seen
the ocean, never would. 
"If I had guts," she murmured. 
 "If I had guts, guts, guts. 
. 
. 
"Nort raised his head at the sound of her voice and smiled

emptily at her from hell. 
 She had no guts. 
 Only a bar and a scar. 
And a word. 
 It struggled behind her closed lips. 
 Suppose she
were to call him over now and draw him close despite his stink? 

Suppose she said the word into the waxy buggerlug he called an
ear? 
 His eyes would change. 
 They would turn into hiseyes-those of the man in the robe. 
 And then Nort would tell what he'd
seen in the Land of Death, what lay beyond the earth and the
worms. 
I'll never say that word to him. 

But the man who had brought Nort back to life and left her anote-left her a word like a cocked pistol she would someday put
to her temple-had known better. 
Nineteen would open the secret. 

Nineteen wasthe secret. 
She caught herself writing it in a puddle on the bar-()-andskidded it to nothingness when she saw Nort watching her. 
The fire burned down rapidly and her customers came backin. 
 She began to dose herself with the Star Whiskey, and by mid-
night she was blackly drunk. 
VIIIShe ceased her narrative, and when he made no immediate com-
ment, she thought at first that the story had put him to sleep. 
 She
began to drowse herself when he asked: "That's all? 
""Yes. 
 That's all. 
 It's very late. 
"
"Um. 
" He was rolling another cigarette. 

"Don't go getting your tobacco dandruff in my bed," she toldhim, more sharply than she had intended. 
"No. 
"

Silence again. 
 The tip of his cigarette winked off and on. 
"You'll be leaving in the morning," she said dully. 

"I should. 
 I think he's left a trap for me here. 
 Just like he leftone for you. 
""Do you really think that number would-"
"If you like your sanity, you don't ever want to say that wordto Nort," the gunslinger said. 
 "Put it out of your head. 
 If you can,
teach yourself that the number after eighteen is twenty. 
 That half
of thirty-eight is seventeen. 
 The man who signed himself Walter
o'Dim is a lot of things, but a liar isn't one of them. 
""But-"
"When the urge comes and it's strong, come up here and hideunder your quilts and say it over and over again-scream it, if you
have to-until the urge passes. 
""A time will come when it won't pass. 
"
The gunslinger made no reply, for he knew this was true. 
 Thetrap had a ghastly perfection. 
 If someone told you you'd go to hell
if you thought about seeing your mother naked (once when the
gunslinger was very young he had been told this very thing),
you'd eventually do it. 
 And why? 
 Because you did notwant toimagine your mother naked. 
 Because you did notwant to go tohell. 
 Because, if given a knife and a hand in which to hold it, the
mind would eventually eat itself. 
 Not because it wanted to; be-
cause it did notwant to. 
Sooner or later Allie would call Nort over and say the word. 

"Don't go," she said. 

"We'll see. 
"
He turned on his side away from her, but she was comforted. 
He would stay, at least for a little while. 
 She drowsed. 
On the edge of sleep she thought again about the way Northad addressed him, in that strange talk. 
 It was the only time she

had seen her strange new lover express emotion. 
 Even his love-making had been a silent thing, and only at the last had his
breathing roughened and then stopped for a second or two. 
 He
was like something out of a fairytale or a myth, a fabulous, dan-
gerous creature. 
 Could he grant wishes? 
 She thought the answer
was yes, and that she would have hers. 
 He would stay awhile. 

That was wish enough for a luckless scarred bitch such as she. 

Tomorrow was time enough to think of another, or a third. 
 She
slept. 
IXIn the morning she cooked him grits, which he ate without com-
ment. 
 He shoveled them in without thinking about her, hardly
seeing her. 
 He knew he should go. 
 Every minute he sat here the
man in black was further away-probably out of the hardpan and
arroyos and into the desert by now. 
 His path had been undeviat-
ingly southeast, and the gunslinger knew why. 
"Do you have a map? 
" he asked, looking up. 

"Of the town? 
" she laughed. 
 "There isn't enough of it to needa map. 
""No. 
 Of what's southeast of here. 
"
Her smile faded. 
 "The desert. 
 Just the desert. 
 I thought you'dstay for a little. 
""What's on the other side of the desert? 
"
"How would I know? 
 Nobody crosses it. 
 Nobody's tried sinceI was here. 
" She wiped her hands on her apron, got potholders,
and dumped the tub of water she had been heating into the sink,
where it splashed and steamed. 
 "The clouds all go that way. 
 It's
like something sucks them-"

He got up. 
"Where are you going? 
" She heard the shrill fear in her voiceand hated it. 
"To the stable. 
 If anyone knows, the hostler will. 
" He put hishands on her shoulders. 
 The hands were hard, but they were also
warm. 
 "And to arrange for my mule. 
 If I'm going to be here, he
should be taken care of. 
 For when I leave. 
"But not yet. 
She looked up at him. 
 "But you watch that Ken-nerly. 
 If he doesn't know a thing, he'll make it up. 
""Thank you, Allie. 
"
When he left she turned to the sink, feeling the hot, warmdrift of her grateful tears. 
 How long since anyone had thanked
her? 
 Someone who mattered? 
XKennerly was a toothless and unpleasant old satyr who had
buried two wives and was plagued with daughters. 
 Two half-
grown ones peeked at the gunslinger from the dusty shadows of
the barn. 
 A baby drooled happily in the dirt. 
 A full-grown one,
blond, dirty, and sensual, watched with a speculative curiosity as
she drew water from the groaning pump beside the building. 
 She
caught the gunslinger's eye, pinched her nipples between her fin-
gers, dropped him a wink, and then went back to pumping. 
The hostler met him halfway between the door to his estab-lishment and the street. 
 His manner vacillated between a kind of
hateful hostility and craven fawning. 
"Hit's bein'cared for, never fear 'at," he said, and before thegunslinger could reply, Kennerly turned on his daughter with his
fists up, a desperate scrawny rooster of a man. 
 "You get in, Soo-
bie! 
 You get right the hell in! 
"

Soobie began to drag her bucket sullenly toward the shack ap-pended to the barn. 
"You meant my mule," the gunslinger said. 
"Yes, sai. 
 Ain't seen no mule in quite a time, specially onethat looks as threaded as your'n-two eyes, four legs . 
. 
. 
" His
face squinched together alarmingly in an expression meant to
convey either extreme pain or the notion that a joke had been
made. 
 The gunslinger assumed it was the latter, although he had
little or no sense of humor himself. 
"Time was they used to grow up wild for want of 'em," Ken-nerly continued, "but the world has moved on. 
 Ain't seen nothin'
but a few mutie oxen and the coach horses and- Soobie, I'll
whale you, 'fore God! 
""I don't bite," the gunslinger said pleasantly. 

Kennerly cringed and grinned. 
 The gunslinger saw the mur-der in his eyes quite clearly, and although he did not fear it, he
marked it as a man might mark a page in a book, one that con-
tained potentially valuable instructions. 
 "It ain't you. 
Gods, no, itain't you. 
" He grinned loosely. 
 "She just naturally gawky. 
 She gota devil. 
 She wild. 
" His eyes darkened. 
 "It's coming to Last Times,
mister. 
 You know how it says in the Book. 
 Children won't obey
their parents, and a plague'll be visited on the multitudes. 
 You
only have to listen to the preacher-woman to know it. 
"The gunslinger nodded, then pointed southeast. 
 "What's outthere? 
"Kennerly grinned again, showing gums and a few sociableyellow teeth. 
 "Dwellers. 
 Weed. 
 Desert. 
 What else? 
" He cackled,
and his eyes measured the gunslinger coldly. 
"How big is the desert? 
"
"Big. 
" Kennerly endeavored to look serious, as if answering aserious question. 
 "Maybe a thousand wheels. 
 Maybe two thousand. 

I can't tell you, mister. 
 There's nothin'out there but devil-grass

and maybe demons. 
 Heard there was a speakin-ring sommers onthe far side, but that 'us prolly a lie. 
 That's the way the other fella
went. 
 The one who fixed up Norty when he was sick. 
""Sick? 
 I heard he was dead. 
"
Kennerly kept grinning. 
 "Well, well. 
 Maybe. 
 But we'regrowed-up men, ain't we? 
""But you believe in demons. 
"
Kennerly looked affronted. 
 "That's a lot different. 
 Preacher-woman says . 
. 
. 
"He blathered and palavered ever onward. 
 The gunslinger tookoff his hat and wiped his forehead. 
 The sun was hot, beating
steadily. 
 Kennerly seemed not to notice. 
 Kennerly had a lot to say,
none of it sensible. 
 In the thin shadow by the livery, the baby girl
was gravely smearing dirt on her face. 
The gunslinger finally grew impatient and cut the man off inmid-spate. 
 "You don't know what's after the desert? 
"Kennerly shrugged. 
 "Some might. 
 The coach ran through partof it fifty years ago. 
 My pap said so. 
 He used to say 'twas moun-
tains. 
 Others say an ocean . 
. 
. 
 a green ocean with monsters. 
 And
some say that's where the world ends. 
 That there ain't nothing but
lights that'll drive a man blind and the face of God with his
mouth open to eat them up. 
""Drivel," the gunslinger said shortly. 

"Sure it is," Kennerly cried happily. 
 He cringed again, hating,fearing, wanting to please. 
"You see my mule is looked after. 
" He flicked Kennerly an-other coin, which Kennerly caught on the fly. 
 The gunslinger
thought of the way a dog will catch a ball. 
"Surely. 
 You stayin'a little? 
"
"I guess I might. 
 There'll be water-"
"-if God wills it! 
 Sure, sure! 
" Kennerly laughed unhappily,

and his eyes went on wanting the gunslinger stretched out dead athis feet. 
 "That Allie's pretty nice when she wants to be, ain't
she? 
" The hostler made a loose circle with his left fist and began
poking his right finger rapidly in and out of it. 
"Did you say something? 
" the gunslinger asked remotely. 

Sudden terror dawned in Kennerly's eyes, like twin moonscoming over the horizon. 
 He put his hands behind his back like a
naughty child caught with the jamjar. 
 "No, sai, not a word. 
 And
I'm right sorry if I did. 
" He caught sight of Soobie leaning out a
window and whirled on her. 
 "I'll whale you now, you little slut-
whore! 
 'Fore God! 
 I'll-"The gunslinger walked away, aware that Kennerly had turnedto watch him, aware of the fact that he could whirl and catch the
hostler with some true and untinctured emotion distilled on his
face. 
 Why bother? 
 It was hot, and he knew what the emotion
would be: just hate. 
 Hate of the outsider. 
 He'd gotten all the man
had to offer. 
 The only sure thing about the desert was its size. 
 The
only sure thing about the town was that it wasn't all played out
here. 
 Not yet. 
XIHe and Allie were in bed when Sheb kicked the door open and
came in with the knife. 
It had been four days, and they had gone by in a blinkinghaze. 
 He ate. 
 He slept. 
 He had sex with Allie. 
 He found that she
played the fiddle and he made her play it for him. 
 She sat by the
window in the milky light of daybreak, only a profile, and played
something haltingly that might have been good if she'd had some
training. 
 He felt a growing (but strangely absentminded) affection

for her and thought this might be the trap the man in black hadleft behind. 
 He walked out sometimes. 
 He thought very little
about everything. 
He didn't hear the little piano player come up-his reflexes had sunk. 
 That didn't seem to matter either, although it would
have frightened him badly in another time and place. 
Allie was naked, the sheet below her breasts, and they werepreparing to make love. 
"Please," she was saying. 
 "Like before, I want that, I want-"
The door crashed open and the piano player made his ridicu-lous, knock-kneed run for the sun. 
 Allie did not scream, although
Sheb held an eight-inch carving knife in his hand. 
 He was mak-
ing a noise, an inarticulate blabbering. 
 He sounded like a man be-
ing drowned in a bucket of mud. 
 Spittle flew. 
 He brought the
knife down with both hands, and the gunslinger caught his wrists
and turned them. 
 The knife went flying. 
 Sheb made a high screech-
ing noise, like a rusty screen door. 
 His hands fluttered in marionette movements, both wrists broken. 
 The wind gritted against
the window. 
 Allie's looking glass on the wall, faintly clouded and
distorted, reflected the room. 
"She was mine! 
" He wept. 
 "She was mine first! 
 Mine! 
"
Allie looked at him and got out of bed. 
 She put on a wrapper,and the gunslinger felt a moment of empathy for a man who must
be seeing himself coming out on the far end of what he once had. 

He was just a little man. 
 And the gunslinger suddenly knew
where he had seen him before. 
 Known him before. 
"It was for you," Sheb sobbed. 
 "It was only for you, Allie. 
 Itwas you first and it was all for you. 
 I-ah, oh God, dear God . 
. 
. 
"
The words dissolved into a paroxysm of unintelligibilities, finally
to tears. 
 He rocked back and forth holding his broken wrists to
his belly. 


"Shhh. 
 Shhh. 
 Let me see. 
" She knelt beside him. 
 "Broken. 
Sheb, you ass. 
 How will you make your living now? 
 Didn't youknow you were never strong? 
" She helped him to his feet. 
 He
tried to hold his hands to his face, but they would not obey, and
he wept nakedly. 
 "Come on over to the table and let me see what I
can do. 
"She led him to the table and set his wrists with slats of kin-dling from the fire box. 
 He wept weakly and without volition. 
"Mejis," the gunslinger said, and the little piano player lookedaround, eyes wide. 
 The gunslinger nodded, amiably enough now
that Sheb was no longer trying to stick a knife in his lights. 

"Mejis,"he said again. 
 "On the Clean Sea. 
""What about it? 
"
"You were there, weren't you? 
 Many and many-a, as they did say. 
""What if I was? 
 I don't remember you. 
"
"But you remember the girl, don't you? 
 The girl named Su-san? 
 And Reap night? 
" His voice took on an edge. 
 "Were you
there for the bonfire? 
"The little man's lips trembled. 
 They were covered with spit. 
His eyes said he knew the truth: he was closer to dead now than
when he'd come bursting in with a knife in his hand. 
"Get out of here," the gunslinger said. 

Understanding dawned in Sheb's eyes. 
 "But you was just aboy! 
One of them three boys! 
You come to count stock, and El-dred Jonas was there, the Coffin Hunter, and-""Get out while you still can," the gunslinger said, and Shebwent, holding his broken wrists before him. 
She came back to the bed. 
 "What was that about? 
"
"Never mind," he said. 

"All right-then where were we? 
"

"Nowhere. 
" He rolled on his side, away from her. 
She said patiently, "You knew about him and me. 
 He did whathe could, which wasn't much, and I took what I could, because I
had to. 
 There's nothing to be done. 
 What else is there? 
" She
touched his shoulder. 
 "Except I'm glad that you are so strong. 
""Not now," he said. 

"Who was she? 
" And then, answering her own question: "Agirl you loved. 
""Leave it, Allie. 
"
"I can make you strong-"
"No," he said. 
 "You can't do that. 
"XIIThe next night the bar was closed. 
 It was whatever passed for the
Sabbath in Tull. 
 The gunslinger went to the tiny, leaning church
by the graveyard while Allie washed tables with strong disinfec-
tant and rinsed kerosene lamp chimneys in soapy water. 
An odd purple dusk had fallen, and the church, lit from theinside, looked almost like a blast furnace from the road. 
"I don't go," Allie had said shortly. 
 "The woman whopreaches has poison religion. 
 Let the respectable ones go. 
"He stood in the vestibule, hidden in a shadow, looking in. 
 Thepews were gone and the congregation stood (he saw Kennerly
and his brood; Castner, owner of the town's scrawny dry-goods
emporium and his slat-sided wife; a few barflies; a few "town"
women he had never seen before; and, surprisingly, Sheb). 
 They
were singing a hymn raggedly, a cappella. 
He looked curiously atthe mountainous woman at the pulpit. 
 Allie had said: "She lives
alone, hardly ever sees anybody. 
 Only comes out on Sunday to

serve up the hellfire. 
 Her name is Sylvia Pittston. 
 She's crazy, butshe's got the hoodoo on them. 
 They like it that way. 
 It suits them. 
"No description could take the measure of the woman. 
 Breastslike earthworks. 
 A huge pillar of a neck overtopped by a pasty
white moon of a face, in which blinked eyes so large and so dark
that they seemed to be bottomless tarns. 
 Her hair was a beautiful
rich brown and it was piled atop her head in a haphazard sprawl,
held by a hairpin almost big enough to be a meat skewer. 
 She
wore a dress that seemed to be made of burlap. 
 The arms that
held the hymnal were slabs. 
 Her skin was creamy, unmarked,
lovely. 
 He thought that she must top three hundred pounds. 
 He
felt a sudden red lust for her that made him feel shaky, and he
turned his head and looked away. 
"Shall we gather at the river,
The beautiful, the beautiful,
The riiiiver,
Shall we gather at the river,
That flows by the kingdom of God. 
"The last note of the last chorus faded off, and there was a mo-ment of shuffling and coughing. 
She waited. 
 When they were settled, she spread her handsover them, as if in benediction. 
 It was an evocative gesture. 
"My dear little brothers and sisters in Christ. 
"
It was a haunting line. 
 For a moment the gunslinger feltmixed feelings of nostalgia and fear, stitched in with an eerie
feeling of dj vu,and he thought: I dreamed this. 
 Or I was herebefore. 
 If so, when? 
 Not Mejis. 
No, not there. 
 He shook the feel-ing off. 
 The audience-perhaps twenty-five all told-had become
dead silent. 
 Every eye touched the preacher-woman. 


"The subject of our meditation tonight is The Interloper. 
" Hervoice was sweet, melodious, the speaking voice of a well-trainedcontralto. 
A little rustle ran through the audience. 

"I feel," Sylvia Pittston said reflectively, "that I know almosteveryone in the Good Book personally. 
 In the last five years I
have worn out three of 'em, precious though any book be in this
ill world, and uncountable numbers before that. 
 I love the story,
and I love the players in that story. 
 I have walked arm in arm 
in the lion's den with Daniel. 
 I stood with David when he was
tempted by Bathsheba as she bathed at the pool. 
 I have been in
the fiery furnace with Shadrach, Meschach, and Abednego. 
 I slew
two thousand with Samson when he swung the jawbone, and was
blinded with St. 
 Paul on the road to Damascus. 
 I wept with Mary
at Golgotha. 
"A soft, shurring sigh in the audience. 

"I have known and loved them. 
 There is only one"-she heldup a finger-"only one player in the greatest of all dramas that I
do not know. 
"Only onewho stands outside with his face in the shadow. 
"Only onewho makes my body tremble and my spirit quail. 
"I fear him. 

"I don't know his mind and I fear him. 

"I fear The Interloper. 
"
Another sigh. 
 One of the women had put a hand over hermouth as if to stop a sound and was rocking, rocking. 
"The Interloper who came to Eve as a snake on its belly in thedust, grinning and writhing. 
 The Interloper who walked among
the Children of Israel while Moses was up on the Mount, who
whispered to them to make a golden idol, a golden calf, and to
worship it with foulness and fornication. 
"Moans, nods. 


"The Interloper! 
"He stood on the balcony with Jezebel and watched as KingAhaz fell screaming to his death, and he and she grinned as the
dogs gathered and lapped up his blood. 
 Oh, my little brothers and
sisters, watch thou for The Interloper. 
""Yes, O Jesus-" This was the man the gunslinger had firstnoticed coming into town, the one with the straw hat. 
"He's always been there, my brothers and sisters. 
 But I don'tknow his mind. 
 And youdon't know his mind. 
 Who could under-stand the awful darkness that swirls there, the pride and the
titanic blasphemy, the unholy glee? 
 And the madness! 
 The gib-
bering madness that walks and crawls and wriggles through
men's most awful wants and desires? 
""O Jesus Savior-"
"It was himwho took our Lord up on the mountain-""Yes-"
"It was himthat tempted him and shewed him all the worldand the world's pleasures-""Yesss-"
"It's himthat will return when Last Times come on the world . 
. 
. 
 and they are coming, my brothers and sisters, can't you
feel they are? 
""Yesss-"
Rocking and sobbing, the congregation became a sea; thewoman seemed to point at all of them and none of them. 
"It's himthat will come as the Antichrist, a crimson king withbloody eyes, to lead men into the flaming bowels of perdition, to
the bloody end of wickedness, as Star Wormword hangs blazing
in the sky, as gall gnaws at the vitals of the children, as women's
wombs give forth monstrosities, as the works of men's hands turn
to blood-""Ahhh-"

"Ah, God-""Gawwwwwwww-"
A woman fell on the floor, her legs crashing up and downagainst the wood. 
 One of her shoes flew off. 
"It's himthat stands behind every fleshly pleasure . 
. 
. 
 himwho made the machines with LaMerk stamped on them, him! 
 TheInterloper! 
"LaMerk,the gunslinger thought. 
 Or maybe she said LeMark. 
The word had some vague resonance for him, but nothing he
could put his finger on. 
 Nonetheless, he filed it away in his
memory, which was capacious. 
"Yes, Lord! 
" they were screaming. 

A man fell on his knees, holding his head and braying. 

"When you take a drink, who holds the bottle? 
"
"The Interloper! 
"
"When you sit down to a faro or a Watch Me table, who turnsthe cards? 
""The Interloper! 
"
"When you riot in the flesh of another's body, when you pol-lute yourself with your solitary hand, to whom do you sell your
soul? 
""In-"
"ter-"
"Oh, Jesus . 
. 
. 
 Oh-"
"-loper-"
"Aw . 
. 
. 
 Aw . 
. 
. 
 Aw . 
. 
. 
"
"And who is he? 
" she cried. 
 But calm within, he could sensethe calmness, the mastery, the control and domination. 
 He thought
suddenly, with terror and absolute surety, that the man who called
himself Walter had left a demon in her. 
 She was haunted. 
 He felt
the hot ripple of sexual desire again through his fear, and thought

this was somehow like the word the man in black had left in Al-lie's mind like a loaded trap. 
The man who was holding his head crashed and blunderedforward. 
"I'm in hell! 
" he screamed up at her. 
 His face twisted andwrithed as if snakes crawled beneath his skin. 
 "I done fornica-
tions! 
 I done gambling! 
 I done weed! 
 I done sins! 
I-" But hisvoice rose skyward in a dreadful, hysterical wail that drowned ar-
ticulation. 
 He held his head as if it would burst like an overripe
cantaloupe at any moment. 
The audience stilled as if a cue had been given, frozen in theirhalf-erotic poses of ecstasy. 
Sylvia Pittston reached down and grasped his head. 
 Theman's cry ceased as her fingers, strong and white, unblemished
and gentle, worked through his hair. 
 He looked up at her dumbly. 
"Who was with you in sin? 
" she asked. 
 Her eyes looked intohis, deep enough, gentle enough, cold enough to drown in. 
"The . 
. 
. 
 The Interloper. 
"
"Called who? 
"
"Called Lord High Satan. 
" Raw, oozing whisper. 

"Will you renounce? 
"
Eagerly: "Yes! 
 Yes! 
 Oh, my Jesus Savior! 
"
She rocked his head; he stared at her with the blank, shinyeyes of the zealot. 
 "If he walked through that door"-she ham-
mered a finger at the vestibule shadows where the gunslinger
stood-"would you renounce him to his face? 
""On my mother's name! 
"
"Do you believe in the eternal love of Jesus? 
"
He began to weep. 
 "You're fucking-A I do-"
"He forgives you that, Jonson. 
"
"Praise God," Jonson said, still weeping. 


"I know he forgives you just as I know he will cast out the un-repentant from his palaces and into the place of burning darkness beyond the end of End-World. 
""Praise God. 
"The congregation, drained, spoke it solemnly. 
"Just as I know this Interloper, this Satan, this Lord of Fliesand Serpents, will be cast down and crushed . 
. 
. 
 will you crush
him if you see him, Jonson? 
""Yes and praise God! 
" Jonson wept. 
 "Wit'bote feet! 
"
"Will you crush him if you see him, brothers and sisters? 
"
"Yess. 
. 
. 
" Sated. 
"If you see him sashaying down Main Street tomorrow? 
"
"Praise God . 
. 
. 
"
The gunslinger faded back out the door and headed for town. 
 The smell of the desert was clear in the air. 
 Almost time to
move on. 
Almost. 
XIIIIn bed again. 
"She won't see you," Allie said. 
 She sounded frightened. 
"She doesn't see anybody. 
 She only comes out on Sunday eve-
nings to scare the hell out of everybody. 
""How long has she been here? 
"
"Twelve years. 
 Or maybe only two. 
 Time's funny, as thouknows. 
 Let's not talk about her. 
""Where did she come from? 
 Which direction? 
"
"I don't know. 
" Lying. 

"Allie? 
"
"I don't know! 
"

"Allie? 
""All right! 
 All right! 
 She came from the dwellers! 
 From thedesert! 
""I thought so. 
" He relaxed a little. 
 Southeast, in other words. 
Along the path he followed. 
 The one he could even see in the sky,
sometimes. 
 And he guessed the preacher-woman had come a lot
further than from the dwellers or even the desert. 
 How had she
traveled so far? 
 By way of some old machine that still worked? 
 A
train, mayhap? 
 "Where does she live? 
"Her voice dropped a notch. 
 "If I tell you, will you make loveto me? 
""I'll make love to you, anyway. 
 But I want to know. 
"
Allie sighed. 
 It was an old, yellow sound, like turning pages. 
"She has a house over the knoll in back of the church. 
 A little
shack. 
 It's where the . 
. 
. 
 the real minister used to live until he
moved out. 
 Is that enough? 
 Are you satisfied? 
""No. 
 Not yet. 
" And he rolled on top of her. 
XIVIt was the last day, and he knew it. 
The sky was an ugly, bruised purple, weirdly lit from abovewith the first fingers of dawn. 
 Allie moved about like a wraith,
lighting lamps, tending corn fritters that sputtered in the skillet. 

He had loved her hard after she had told him what he had to 
know, and she had sensed the coming end and had given more than
she had ever given, and she had given it with desperation against
the coming of dawn, given it with the tireless energy of sixteen. 
 But
she was pale this morning, on the brink of menopause again. 
She served him without a word. 
 He ate rapidly, chewing,

swallowing, chasing each bite with hot coffee. 
 Allie went to thebatwings and stood staring out at the morning, at the silent battal-
ions of slow-moving clouds. 
"It's going to dust up today. 
"
"I'm not surprised. 
"
"Are you ever? 
" she asked ironically, and turned to watch himget his hat. 
 He clapped it on his head and brushed past her. 
"Sometimes," he told her. 
 He only saw her once more alive. 
XVBy the time he reached Sylvia Pittston's shack, the wind had 
died utterly and the whole world seemed to wait. 
 He had been in
desert country long enough to know that the longer the lull, the
harder the blow when it finally came. 
 A queer, flat light hung over
everything. 
There was a large wooden cross nailed to the door of theplace, which was leaning and tired. 
 He rapped and waited. 
 No an-
swer. 
 He rapped again. 
 No answer. 
 He drew back and kicked in
the door with one hard shot of his right boot. 
 A small bolt on 
the inside ripped free. 
 The door banged against a haphazardly
planked wall and scared rats into skittering flight. 
 Sylvia Pittston
sat in the hall, in a mammoth ironwood rocker, and looked at him
calmly with those great and dark eyes. 
 The stormlight fell on her
cheeks in crazy half-tones. 
 She wore a shawl. 
 The rocker made
tiny squeaking noises. 
They looked at each other for a long, clockless moment. 

"You will never catch him," she said. 
 "You walk in the way ofevil. 
""He came to you," the gunslinger said. 


"And to my bed. 
 He spoke to me in the Tongue. 
 The HighSpeech. 
 He-""He screwed you. 
 In every sense of the word. 
"She did not flinch. 
 "You walk an evil way, gunslinger. 
 Youstand in shadows. 
 You stood in the shadows of the holy place last
night. 
 Did you think I couldn't see you? 
""Why did he heal the weed-eater? 
"
"He's an angel of God. 
 He said so. 
"
"I hope he smiled when he said it. 
"
She drew her lip back from her teeth in an unconsciouslyferal gesture. 
 "He told me you would follow. 
 He told me what to
do. 
 He said you are the Antichrist. 
"The gunslinger shook his head. 
 "He didn't say that. 
"
She smiled up at him lazily. 
 "He said you would want to bedme. 
 Is it true? 
""Did you ever meet a man who didn't want to bed you? 
"
"The price of my flesh would be your life, gunslinger. 
 He hasgot me with child. 
 Not his, but the child of a great king. 
 If you in-
vade me . 
. 
. 
" She let the lazy smile complete her thought. 
 At the
same time she gestured with her huge, mountainous thighs. 
 They
stretched beneath her garment like pure marble slabs. 
 The effect
was dizzying. 
The gunslinger dropped his hands to the butts of his pistols. 
"You have a demon, woman, not a king. 
 Yet fear not. 
 I can re-
move it. 
"The effect was instantaneous. 
 She recoiled against the chair,and a weasel look flashed on her face. 
 "Don't touch me! 
 Don't
come near me! 
 You dare not touch the Bride of God! 
""Want to bet? 
" the gunslinger said. 
 He stepped toward her. 
"As the gambler said when he laid down a handful of cups and
wands, just watch me. 
"

The flesh on the huge frame quaked. 
 Her face had become acaricature of terror, and she stabbed the sign of the Eye at himwith pronged fingers. 
"The desert," the gunslinger said. 
 "What after the desert? 
"
"You'll never catch him! 
 Never! 
 Never! 
 You'll burn! 
 He toldme so! 
""I'll catch him," the gunslinger said. 
 "We both know it. 
 Whatis beyond the desert? 
""No! 
"
"Answer me! 
"
"No! 
"
He slid forward, dropped to his knees, and grabbed herthighs. 
 Her legs locked like a vise. 
 She made strange, lustful
keening noises. 
"The demon, then," he said. 
 "Out it comes. 
"
"No-"
He pried the legs apart and unholstered one of his guns. 

"No! 
 No! 
 No! 
" Her breath came in short, savage grunts. 

"Answer me. 
"
She rocked in the chair and the floor trembled. 
 Prayers andgarbled bits of scripture flew from her lips. 
He rammed the barrel of the gun forward. 
 He could feel theterrified wind sucked into her lungs more than he could hear it. 

Her hands beat at his head; her legs drummed against the floor. 

And at the same time the huge body tried to suck the invader in. 

Outside nothing watched them but the bruised and dusty sky. 
She screamed something, high and inarticulate. 

"What? 
"
"Mountains! 
"
"What about them? 
"
"He stops . 
. 
. 
 on the other side . 
. 
. 
 s-s-sweet Jesus! 
 . 
. 
. 
 to 

m-make his strength. 
 Med-m-meditation, do you understand? 
 Oh . 
. 
. 
 I'm . 
. 
. 
 I'm . 
. 
. 
"The whole huge mountain of flesh suddenly strained for-ward and upward, yet he was careful not to let her secret flesh
touch him. 
Then she seemed to wilt and grow smaller, and she wept withher hands in her lap. 
"So," he said, getting up. 
 "The demon is served, eh? 
"
"Get out. 
 You've killed the child of the Crimson King. 
 Butyou will be repaid. 
 I set my watch and warrant on it. 
 Now get out. 

Get out. 
"He stopped at the door and looked back. 
 "No child," he saidbriefly. 
 "No angel, prince, no demon. 
""Leave me alone. 
"
He did. 
XVIBy the time he arrived at Kennerly's, a queer obscurity had come
over the northern horizon and he knew it was dust. 
 Over Tull the
air was still dead quiet. 
Kennerly was waiting for him on the chaff-strewn stage thatwas the floor of his barn. 
 "Leaving? 
" He grinned abjectly at the
gunslinger. 
"Yar. 
"
"Not before the storm? 
"
"Ahead of it. 
"
"The wind goes faster than any man on a mule. 
 In the open itcan kill you. 
""I'll want the mule now," the gunslinger said simply. 


"Sure. 
" But Kennerly did not turn away, merely stood as ifsearching for something further to say, grinning his groveling,hate-filled grin, and his eyes flicked up and over the gunslinger's
shoulder. 
The gunslinger sidestepped and turned at the same time, andthe heavy stick of stovewood that the girl Soobie held swished
through the air, grazing his elbow only. 
 She lost hold of it with
the force of her swing and it clattered over the floor. 
 In the explo-
sive height of the loft, barnswallows took shadowed wing. 
The girl looked at him bovinely. 
 Her breasts thrust with over-ripe grandeur at the wash-faded shirt she wore. 
 One thumb
sought the haven of her mouth with dream-like slowness. 
The gunslinger turned back to Kennerly. 
 Kennerly's grin was huge. 
 His skin was waxy yellow. 
 His eyes rolled in their
sockets. 
 "I . 
. 
. 
" he began in a phlegm-filled whisper and could not
continue. 
"The mule," the gunslinger prodded gently. 

"Sure, sure, sure," Kennerly whispered, the grin now touchedwith incredulity that he should still be alive. 
 He shuffled to get it. 
The gunslinger moved to where he could watch the man go. 
The hostler brought the mule back and handed him the bridle. 

"You get in an'tend your sister," he said to Soobie. 
Soobie tossed her head and didn't move. 

The gunslinger left them there, staring at each other acrossthe dusty, droppings-strewn floor, he with his sick grin, she 
with dumb, inanimate defiance. 
 Outside the heat was still like a
hammer. 


XVIIHe walked the mule up the center of the street, his boots send-ing up squirts of dust. 
 His waterbags, swollen with water, were
strapped across the mule's back. 
He stopped at the tonk, but Allie was not there. 
 The place wasdeserted, battened down for the storm, but still dirty from the
night before. 
 It stank of sour beer. 
He filled his tote sack with corn meal, dried and roasted corn, and half of the raw hamburg in the cooler. 
 He left four 
gold pieces stacked on the planked counter. 
 Allie did not come
down. 
 Sheb's piano bid him a silent, yellow-toothed toodle-oo. 

He stepped back out and cinched the tote sack across the 
mule's back. 
 There was a tight feeling in his throat. 
 He might still 
avoid the trap, but the chances were small. 
 He was, after all, The
Interloper. 
He walked past the shuttered, waiting buildings, feeling theeyes that peered through cracks and chinks. 
 The man in black had
played God in Tull. 
 He had spoken of a King's child, a red prince. 

Was it only a sense of the cosmic comic, or a matter of despera-
tion? 
 It was a question of some importance. 
There was a shrill, harried scream from behind him, anddoors suddenly threw themselves open. 
 Forms lunged. 
 The trap
was sprung. 
 Men in longhandles and men in dirty dungarees. 

Women in slacks and in faded dresses. 
 Even children, tagging af-
ter their parents. 
 And in every hand there was a chunk of wood or
a knife. 
His reaction was automatic, instantaneous, inbred. 
 He whirledon his heels while his hands pulled the guns from their holsters,
the butts heavy and sure in his hands. 
 It was Allie, and of course it
had to be Allie, coming at him with her face distorted, the scar a

hellish purple in the lowering light. 
 He saw that she was heldhostage; the distorted, grimacing face of Sheb peered over her
shoulder like a witch's familiar. 
 She was his shield and sacrifice. 

He saw it all, clear and shadowless in the frozen, deathless light
of the sterile calm, and heard her:"Kill me, Roland, kill me! 
 I said the word, nineteen,I said,and he told me . 
. 
. 
 I can't bear it-"The hands were trained to give her what she wanted. 
 He wasthe last of his breed and it was not only his mouth that knew the
High Speech. 
 The guns beat their heavy, atonal music into the air. 

Her mouth flapped and she sagged and the guns fired again. 
 The
last expression on her face might have been gratitude. 
 Sheb's
head snapped back. 
 They both fell into the dust. 
They've gone to the land of Nineteen, he thought. 
Whatever isthere. 
Sticks flew through the air, rained on him. 
 He staggered,fended them off. 
 One with a nail pounded raggedly through it
ripped at his arm and drew blood. 
 A man with a beard stubble and
sweat-stained armpits lunged, flying at him with a dull kitchen
knife held in one paw. 
 The gunslinger shot him dead and the man
thumped into the street. 
 His false teeth shot out as his chin struck
and grinned, spit-shiny, in the dirt. 
"SATAN! 
" someone was screaming: "THE ACCURSED! 
BRING HIM DOWN! 
""THE INTERLOPER! 
" another voice cried. 
 Sticks rained onhim. 
 A knife struck his boot and bounced. 
 "THE INTERLOPER! 

THE ANTICHRIST! 
"He blasted his way through the middle of them, running asthe bodies fell, his hands picking the targets with ease and dread-
ful accuracy. 
 Two men and a woman went down, and he ran
through the hole they left. 
He led them a feverish parade across the street and toward the

rickety general store/barber shop that faced Sheb's. 
 He mountedthe boardwalk, turned again, and fired the rest of his loads into
the charging crowd. 
 Behind them, Sheb and Allie and the others
lay crucified in the dust. 
They never hesitated or faltered, although every shot he firedfound a vital spot and although they had probably never seen 
a gun. 
He retreated, moving his body like a dancer to avoid the fly-ing missiles. 
 He reloaded as he went, with a rapidity that had also
been trained into his fingers. 
 They shuttled busily between gun-
belts and cylinders. 
 The mob came up over the boardwalk and he
stepped into the general store and rammed the door closed. 
 The
large display window to the right shattered inward and three men
crowded through. 
 Their faces were zealously blank, their eyes
filled with bland fire. 
 He shot them all, and the two that followed
them. 
 They fell in the window, hung on the jutting shards of glass,
choking the opening. 
The door crashed and shuddered with their weight and hecould hear hervoice: "THE KILLER! 
 YOUR SOULS! 
 THECLOVEN HOOF! 
"The door ripped off its hinges and fell straight in, making a flat handclap. 
 Dust puffed up from the floor. 
 Men, women, and
children charged him. 
Spittle and stovewood flew. 
He shot his guns empty and they fell like ninepins in a game of Points. 
He retreated into the barber shop, shoving over a flour barrel, rolling it
at them, throwing a pan of boiling water that contained two
nicked straight-razors. 
 They came on, screaming with frantic in-
coherency. 
 From somewhere, Sylvia Pittston exhorted them, her
voice rising and falling in blind inflections. 
 He pushed shells into
hot chambers, smelling the aromas of shave and tonsure, smelling
his own flesh as the calluses at the tips of his fingers singed. 
He went through the back door and onto the porch. 
 The flat

scrubland was at his back now, flatly denying the town thatcrouched against its dirty haunch. 
 Three men hustled around the
corner, with large betrayer grins on their faces. 
 They saw him,
saw him seeing them, and the grins curdled in the second before
he mowed them down. 
 A woman had followed them, howling. 

She was large and fat and known to the patrons of Sheb's as Aunt
Mill. 
 The gunslinger blew her backwards and she landed in a
whorish sprawl, her skirt rucked up between her thighs. 
He went down the steps and walked backwards into thedesert: ten paces, twenty. 
 The back door of the barber shop flew
open and they boiled out. 
 He caught a glimpse of Sylvia Pittston. 

He opened up. 
 They fell in squats, they fell backwards, they tum-
bled over the railing into the dust. 
 They cast no shadows in the
deathless purple light of the day. 
 He realized he was screaming. 

He had been screaming all along. 
 His eyes felt like cracked ball
bearings. 
 His balls had drawn up against his belly. 
 His legs were
wood. 
 His ears were iron. 
The guns were empty and they boiled at him, transmogrifiedinto an Eye and a Hand, and he stood, screaming and reloading,
his mind far away and absent, letting his hands do their reloading
trick. 
 Could he hold up a hand, tell them he had spent a thousand
years learning this trick and others, tell them of the guns and the
blood that had blessed them? 
 Not with his mouth. 
 But his hands
could speak their own tale. 
They were in throwing range as he finished reloading, and astick struck him on the forehead and brought blood in abraded
drops. 
 In two seconds they would be in gripping distance. 
 In the
forefront he saw Kennerly; Kennerly's younger daughter, perhaps
eleven; Soobie; two male barflies; a whore named Amy Feldon. 

He let them all have it, and the ones behind them. 
 Their bodies
thumped like scarecrows. 
 Blood and brains flew in streamers. 


They halted for a moment, startled, the mob face shiveringinto individual, bewildered faces. 
 A man ran in a large, screamingcircle. 
 A woman with blisters on her hands turned her head up
and cackled feverishly at the sky. 
 The man whom he had first seen
sitting gravely on the steps of the mercantile store made a sudden
and amazing load in his pants. 
He had time to reload one gun. 

Then it was Sylvia Pittston, running at him, waving a woodencross in each hand. 
 "DEVIL! 
 DEVIL! 
 DEVIL! 
 CHILDKILLER! 

MONSTER! 
 DESTROY HIM, BROTHERS AND SISTERS! 

DESTROY THE CHILDKILLING INTERLOPER! 
"He put a shot into each of the crosspieces, blowing the roodsto splinters, and four more into the woman's head. 
 She seemed to
accordion into herself and waver like a shimmer of heat. 
They all stared at her for a moment in tableau, while the gun-slinger's fingers did their reloading trick. 
 The tips of his fingers
sizzled and burned. 
 Neat circles were branded into the tips of
each one. 
There were fewer of them now; he had run through them likea mower's scythe. 
 He thought they would break with the woman
dead, but someone threw a knife. 
 The hilt struck him squarely be-
tween the eyes and knocked him over. 
 They ran at him in a reach-
ing, vicious clot. 
 He fired his guns empty again, lying in his own
spent shells. 
 His head hurt and he saw large brown circles in front
of his eyes. 
 He missed with one shot, downed eleven with the
rest. 
But they were on him, the ones that were left. 
 He fired thefour shells he had reloaded, and then they were beating him, stab-
bing him. 
 He threw a pair of them off his left arm and rolled
away. 
 His hands began doing their infallible trick. 
 He was stabbed
in the shoulder. 
 He was stabbed in the back. 
 He was hit across the

ribs. 
 He was stabbed in the ass with what might have been ameat-fork. 
 A small boy squirmed at him and made the only deep
cut, across the bulge of his calf. 
 The gunslinger blew his head off. 
They were scattering and he let them have it again, back-shooting now. 
 The ones left began to retreat toward the sand-
colored, pitted buildings, and still the hands did their business,
like overeager dogs that want to do their rolling-over trick for you
not once or twice but all night, and the hands were cutting them
down as they ran. 
 The last one made it as far as the steps of the
barber shop's back porch, and then the gunslinger's bullet took
him in the back of the head. 
 "Yowp! 
"the man cried, and fell over. 
It was Tull's final word on the business. 
Silence came back in, filling jagged spaces. 

The gunslinger was bleeding from perhaps twenty differentwounds, all of them shallow except for the cut across his calf. 
 He
bound it with a strip of shirt and then straightened and examined
his kill. 
They trailed in a twisting, zigzagging path from the backdoor of the barber shop to where he stood. 
 They lay in all posi-
tions. 
 None of them seemed to be sleeping. 
He followed the trail of death, counting as he went. 
 In thegeneral store, one man sprawled with his arms wrapped lovingly
around the cracked candy jar he had dragged down with him. 
He ended up where he had started, in the middle of the de-serted main street. 
 He had shot and killed thirty-nine men, four-
teen women, and five children. 
 He had shot and killed everyone
in Tull. 
A sickish-sweet odor came to him on the first of the dry, stir-ring wind. 
 He followed it, then looked up and nodded. 
 The decay-
ing body of Nort was spread-eagled atop the plank roof of Sheb's,
crucified with wooden pegs. 
 Mouth and eyes were open. 
 The



mark of a large and purple cloven hoof had been pressed into theskin of his grimy forehead. 
The gunslinger walked out of town. 
 His mule was standing ina clump of weed about forty yards further along the remnant of
the coach road. 
 The gunslinger led it back to Kennerly's stable. 

Outside, the wind was playing a jagtime tune. 
 He put the mule up
for the time being and went back to the tonk. 
 He found a ladder in
the back shed, went up to the roof, and cut Nort loose. 
 The body
was lighter than a bag of sticks. 
 He tumbled it down to join the
common people, those who would only have to die once. 
 Then he
went back inside, ate hamburgers, and drank three beers while 
the light failed and the sand began to fly. 
 That night he slept in the
bed where he and Allie had lain. 
 He had no dreams. 
 The next
morning the wind was gone and the sun was its usual bright and
forgetful self. 
 The bodies had gone south like tumbleweeds with
the wind. 
 At midmorning, after he had bound all his cuts, he
moved on as well. 
XVIIIHe thought Brown had fallen asleep. 
 The fire was down to no
more than a spark and the bird, Zoltan, had put his head under his
wing. 
Just as he was about to get up and spread a pallet in the cor-ner, Brown said, "There. 
 You've told it. 
 Do you feel better? 
"The gunslinger started. 
 "Why would I feel bad? 
"
"You're human, you said. 
 No demon. 
 Or did you lie? 
"
"I didn't lie. 
" He felt the grudging admittance in him: he likedBrown. 
 Honestly did. 
 And he hadn't lied to the dweller in any
way. 
 "Who are you, Brown? 
 Really, I mean. 
"

"Just me," he said, unperturbed. 
 "Why do you have to thinkyou're in the middle of such a mystery? 
"The gunslinger lit a smoke without replying. 
"I think you're very close to your man in black," Brown said. 
"Is he desperate? 
""I don't know. 
"
"Are you? 
"
"Not yet," the gunslinger said. 
 He looked at Brown with ashade of defiance. 
 "I go where I have to go, do what I have to do. 
""That's good then," Brown said and turned over and went tosleep. 
XIXThe next morning, Brown fed him and sent him on his way. 
 In the
daylight he was an amazing figure with his scrawny, sunburnt
chest, pencil-like collarbones, and loony shock of red hair. 
 The
bird perched on his shoulder. 
"The mule? 
" the gunslinger asked. 

"I'll eat it," Brown said. 

"Okay. 
"
Brown offered his hand and the gunslinger shook it. 
 Thedweller nodded to the southeast. 
 "Walk easy. 
 Long days and
pleasant nights. 
""May you have twice the number. 
"
They nodded at each other and then the man Allie had calledRoland walked away, his body festooned with guns and water. 
 He
looked back once. 
 Brown was rooting furiously at his little
cornbed. 
 The crow was perched on the low roof of his dwelling
like a gargoyle. 


XXThe fire was down, and the stars had begun to pale off. 
 The windwalked restlessly, told its tale to no one. 
 The gunslinger twitched
in his sleep and was still again. 
 He dreamed a thirsty dream. 
 
In the darkness the shape of the mountains was invisible. 
 Any
thoughts of guilt, any feelings of regret, had faded. 
 The desert
had baked them out. 
 He found himself thinking more and more
about Cort, who had taught him to shoot. 
 Cort had known black
from white. 
He stirred again and woke. 
 He blinked at the dead fire with itsown shape superimposed over the other, more geometrical one. 

He was a romantic, he knew it, and he guarded the knowledge
jealously. 
 It was a secret he had shared with only a few over the
years. 
 The girl named Susan, the girl from Mejis, had been one of
them. 
That, of course, made him think of Cort again. 
 Cort was dead. 
They were all dead, except for him. 
 The world had moved on. 
The gunslinger shouldered his gunna and moved on with it. 


CHAPTER TWO
The Way Station
A nursery rhyme had been playing itself through his mind all day,the maddening kind of thing that will not let go, that mockingly
ignores all commands of the conscious mind to cease and desist. 

The rhyme was:The rain in Spain falls on the plain. 

There is joy and also pain
but the rain in Spain falls on the plain. 
Time's a sheet, life's a stain,All the things we know will change
and all those things remain the same,
but be ye mad or only sane,
the rain in Spain falls on the plain. 
We walk in love but fly in chainsAnd the planes in Spain fall in the rain. 
He didn't know what a plane was in the context of the rhyme'slast couplet, but knew why the rhyme had occurred to him in the

first place. 
 There had been the recurring dream of his room in the castle and of his mother, who had sung it to him as he lay
solemnly in the tiny bed by the window of many colors. 
 She did
not sing it at bedtimes because all small boys born to the High
Speech must face the dark alone, but she sang to him at naptimes
and he could remember the heavy gray rainlight that shivered into
rainbows on the counterpane; he could feel the coolness of the
room and the heavy warmth of blankets, love for his mother and
her red lips, the haunting melody of the little nonsense lyric, and
her voice. 
Now it came back maddeningly, like a dog chasing its owntail in his mind as he walked. 
 All his water was gone, and he
knew he was very likely a dead man. 
 He had never expected it to
come to this, and he was sorry. 
 Since noon he had been watching
his feet rather than the way ahead. 
 Out here even the devil-grass
had grown stunted and yellow. 
 The hardpan had disintegrated in
places to mere rubble. 
 The mountains were not noticeably clearer,
although sixteen days had passed since he had left the hut of 
the last homesteader, a loony-sane young man on the edge of the
desert. 
 He had had a bird, the gunslinger remembered, but he
couldn't remember the bird's name. 
He watched his feet move up and down like the heddles of aloom, listened to the nonsense rhyme sing itself into a pitiful gar-
ble in his mind, and wondered when he would fall down for the
first time. 
 He didn't want to fall, even though there was no one to
see him. 
 It was a matter of pride. 
 A gunslinger knows pride, that
invisible bone that keeps the neck stiff. 
 What hadn't come to him
from his father had been kicked into him by Cort, a boy's gentle-
man if there ever was one. 
 Cort, yar, with his red bulb of a nose
and his scarred face. 
He stopped and looked up suddenly. 
 It made his head buzz7

and for a moment his whole body seemed to float. 
 The mountainsdreamed against the far horizon. 
 But there was something else up
ahead, something much closer. 
 Perhaps only five miles away. 
 He
squinted at it, but his eyes were sandblasted and going glareblind. 

He shook his head and began to walk again. 
 The rhyme circled
and buzzed. 
 About an hour later he fell down and skinned his
hands. 
 He looked at the tiny beads of blood on his flaked skin
with disbelief. 
 The blood looked no thinner; it looked like any
blood, now dying in the air. 
 It seemed almost as smug as the
desert. 
 He dashed the drops away, hating them blindly. 
 Smug? 

Why not? 
 The blood was not thirsty. 
 The blood was being served. 

The blood was being made sacrifice unto. 
 Blood sacrifice. 
 All the
blood needed to do was run . 
. 
. 
 and run . 
. 
. 
 and run. 
He looked at the splotches that had landed on the hardpan andwatched as they were sucked up with uncanny suddenness. 
 How
do you like that, blood? 
 How does that suit you? 
O Jesus, I'm far gone. 

He got up, holding his hands to his chest, and the thing he'dseen earlier was almost in front of him, so close it made him cry
out-a dust-choked crow-croak. 
 It was a building. 
 No, twobuild-ings, surrounded by a fallen rail fence. 
 The wood seemed old,
fragile to the point of elvishness; it was wood being transmogri-
fied into sand. 
 One of the buildings had been a stable-the shape
was clear and unmistakable. 
 The other was a house, or an inn. 
 A
way station for the coach line. 
 The tottering sand-house (the wind
had crusted the wood with grit until it looked like a sand castle
that the sun had beat upon at low tide and hardened to a tempo-
rary abode) cast a thin line of shadow, and someone sat in the
shadow, leaning against the building. 
 And the building seemed to
lean with the burden of his weight. 
Him, then. 
 At last. 
 The man in black. 


The gunslinger stood with his hands to his chest, unaware ofhis declamatory posture, and gawped. 
 But instead of the tremen-dous winging excitement he had expected (or perhaps fear, or
awe), there was nothing but the dim, atavistic guilt for the sudden,
raging hate of his own blood moments earlier and the endless
ring-a-rosy of the childhood song:. 
. 
. 
 the rain in Spain . 
. 
. 

He moved forward, drawing one gun. 

. 
. 
. 
 falls on the plain. 

He came the last quarter mile at a jolting, flat-footed run, nottrying to hide himself; there was nothing to hide behind. 
 His
short shadow raced him. 
 He was not aware that his face had be-
come a gray and dusty deathmask of exhaustion; he was aware of
nothing but the figure in the shadow. 
 It did not occur to him until
later that the figure might even have been dead. 
He kicked through one of the leaning fence rails (it broke intwo without a sound, almost apologetically) and lunged across the
dazzled and silent stable yard, bringing the gun up. 
"You're covered! 
 You're covered! 
 Hands up, you whoreson,you're-"The figure moved restlessly and stood up. 
 The gunslingerthought: My God, he is worn away to nothing, what's happened tohim? 
Because the man in black had shrunk two full feet and hishair had gone white. 
He paused, struck dumb, his head buzzing tunelessly. 
 Hisheart was racing at a lunatic rate and he thought, I'm dying righthere-He sucked the white-hot air into his lungs and hung his headfor a moment. 
 When he raised it again, he saw it wasn't the man
in black but a boy with sun-bleached hair, regarding him with
eyes that did not even seem interested. 
 The gunslinger stared at

him blankly and then shook his head in negation. 
 But the boy sur-vived his refusal to believe; he was a strong delusion. 
 One wear-
ing blue jeans with a patch on one knee and a plain brown shirt of
rough weave. 
The gunslinger shook his head again and started for the stablewith his head lowered, gun still in hand. 
 He couldn't think yet. 

His head was filled with motes and there was a huge, thrumming
ache building in it. 
The inside of the stable was silent and dark and explodingwith heat. 
 The gunslinger stared around himself with huge, float-
ing walleyes. 
 He made a drunken about-face and saw the boy
standing in the ruined doorway, staring at him. 
 A blade of pain
slipped smoothly into his head, cutting from temple to temple, di-
viding his brain like an orange. 
 He reholstered his gun, swayed,
put out his hands as if to ward off phantoms, and fell over on his
face. 
IIWhen he woke up he was on his back, and there was a pile of
light, odorless hay beneath his head. 
 The boy had not been able to
move him, but he had made him reasonably comfortable. 
 And he
was cool. 
 He looked down at himself and saw that his shirt was
dark and wet. 
 He licked at his face and tasted water. 
 He blinked at
it. 
 His tongue seemed to swell in his mouth. 
The boy was hunkered down beside him. 
 When he saw thegunslinger's eyes were open, he reached behind him and gave the
gunslinger a dented tin can filled with water. 
 He grasped it with
trembling hands and allowed himself to drink a little-just a lit-
tle. 
 When that was down and sitting in his belly, he drank a little

more. 
 Then he spilled the rest over his face and made shockedblowing noises. 
 The boy's pretty lips curved in a solemn little
smile. 
"Would you want something to eat, sir? 
"
"Not yet," the gunslinger said. 
 There was still a sick ache inhis head from the sunstroke, and the water sat uneasily in his
stomach, as if it did not know where to go. 
 "Who are you? 
""My name is John Chambers. 
 You can call me Jake. 
 I have afriend-well, sort of a friend, she works for us-who calls me
'Bama sometimes, but you can call me Jake. 
"The gunslinger sat up, and the sick ache became hard and im-mediate. 
 He leaned forward and lost a brief struggle with his
stomach. 
"There's more," Jake said. 
 He took the can and walked towardthe rear of the stable. 
 He paused and smiled back at the gun-
slinger uncertainly. 
 The gunslinger nodded at him and then put
his head down and propped it with his hands. 
 The boy was well-
made, handsome, perhaps ten or eleven. 
 There had been a shadow
of fear on his face, but that was all right; the gunslinger would
have trusted him far less if the boy hadn't shown fear. 
A strange, thumping hum began at the rear of the stable. 
 Thegunslinger raised his head alertly, hands going to the butts of his
guns. 
 The sound lasted for perhaps fifteen seconds and then quit. 

The boy came back with the can-filled now. 
The gunslinger drank sparingly again, and this time it was alittle better. 
 The ache in his head was fading. 
"I didn't know what to do with you when you fell down," Jakesaid. 
 "For a couple of seconds there, I thought you were going to
shoot me. 
""Maybe I was. 
 I thought you were somebody else. 
"
"The priest? 
"

The gunslinger looked up sharply. 
The boy studied him, frowning. 
 "He camped in the yard. 
 Iwas in the house over there. 
 Or maybe it was a depot. 
 I didn't like
him, so I didn't come out. 
 He came in the night and went on the
next day. 
 I would have hidden from you, but I was sleeping when
you came. 
" He looked darkly over the gunslinger's head. 
 "I don't
like people. 
 They fuck me up. 
""What did he look like? 
"
The boy shrugged. 
 "Like a priest. 
 He was wearing blackthings. 
""A hood and a cassock? 
"
"What's a cassock? 
"
"A robe. 
 Like a dress. 
"
The boy nodded. 
 "That's about right. 
"
The gunslinger leaned forward, and something in his facemade the boy recoil a little. 
 "How long ago? 
 Tell me, for your fa-
ther's sake. 
""I . 
. 
. 
 I . 
. 
. 
"
Patiently, the gunslinger said, "I'm not going to hurt you. 
"
"I don't know. 
 I can't remember time. 
 Every day is the same. 
"
For the first time the gunslinger wondered consciously howthe boy had come to this place, with dry and man-killing leagues
of desert all around it. 
 But he would not make it his concern, not
yet, at least. 
 "Make your best guess. 
 Long ago? 
""No. 
 Not long. 
 I haven't been here long. 
"
The fire lit in him again. 
 He snatched up the can and drankfrom it with hands that trembled the smallest bit. 
 A fragment of
the cradle song recurred, but this time, instead of his mother's
face, he saw the scarred face of Alice, who had been his jilly in
the now-defunct town of Tull. 
 "A week? 
 Two? 
 Three? 
"The boy looked at him distractedly. 
 "Yes. 
"

"Which? 
""A week. 
 Or two. 
" He looked aside, blushing a little. 
 "Threepoops ago, that's the only way I can measure things now. 
 He
didn't even drink. 
 I thought he might be the ghost of a priest, like
in this movie I saw once, only Zorro figured out he wasn't a priest
at all, or a ghost, either. 
 He was just a banker who wanted some
land because there was gold on it. 
 Mrs. 
 Shaw took me to see that
movie. 
 It was in Times Square. 
"None of this made any sense to the gunslinger, so he did notcomment on it. 
"I was scared," the boy said. 
 "I've been scared almost all thetime. 
" His face quivered like crystal on the edge of the ultimate,
destructive high note. 
 "He didn't even build a fire. 
 He just sat
there. 
 I don't even know if he went to sleep. 
"Close! 
 Closer than he had ever been, by the gods! 
 In spite ofhis extreme dehydration, his hands felt faintly moist; greasy. 
"There's some dried meat," the boy said. 

"All right. 
" The gunslinger nodded. 
 "Good. 
"
The boy got up to fetch it, his knees popping slightly. 
 Hemade a fine straight figure. 
 The desert had not yet sapped him. 

His arms were thin, but the skin, although tanned, had not dried
and cracked. 
 He's got juice,the gunslinger thought. 
 Mayhapsome sand in his craw, as well, or he would have taken one of my
guns and shot me right where I lay. 
Or perhaps the boy simply hadn't thought of it. 

The gunslinger drank from the can again. 
 Sand in his craw ornot, he didn't come from this place. 
Jake came back with a pile of dried jerky on what looked likea sun-scoured breadboard. 
 The meat was tough, stringy, and salty
enough to make the cankered lining of the gunslinger's mouth
sing. 
 He ate and drank until he felt logy, and then settled back. 


The boy ate only a little, picking at the dark strands with an odddelicacy. 
The gunslinger regarded him, and the boy looked back at himcandidly enough. 
 "Where did you come from, Jake? 
" he asked
finally. 
"I don't know. 
" The boy frowned. 
 "I didknow. 
 I knew when Icame here, but it's all fuzzy now, like a bad dream when you wake
up. 
 I have lots of bad dreams. 
 Mrs. 
 Shaw used to say it was be-
cause I watched too many horror movies on Channel Eleven. 
""What's a channel? 
" A wild idea occurred to him. 
 "Is it like abeam? 
""No-it's TV. 
"
"What's teevee? 
"
"I-" The boy touched his forehead. 
 "Pictures. 
"
"Did somebody tote you here? 
 This Mrs. 
 Shaw? 
"
"No," the boy said. 
 "I just washere. 
""Who is Mrs. 
 Shaw? 
"
"I don't know. 
"
"Why did she call you 'Bama? 
"
"I don't remember. 
"
"You're not making any sense," the gunslinger said flatly. 

Quite suddenly the boy was on the verge of tears. 
 "I can'thelp it. 
 I was just here. 
 If you asked me about TV and channels
yesterday, I bet I still could have remembered! 
 Tomorrow I proba-
bly won't even remember I'm Jake-not unless you tell me, and
you won't be here, will you? 
 You're going to go away and I'll
starve because you ate up almost all my food. 
 I didn't ask to be
here. 
 I don't like it. 
 It's spooky. 
""Don't feel so sorry for yourself. 
 Make do. 
"
"I didn't ask to be here," the boy repeated with bewildereddefiance. 


The gunslinger ate another piece of the meat, chewing the saltout of it before swallowing. 
 The boy had become part of it, andthe gunslinger was convinced he told the truth-he had not asked
for it. 
 It was too bad. 
 He himself . 
. 
. 
 hehad asked for it. 
 But hehad not asked for the game to become this dirty. 
 He had not asked
to turn his guns on the townsfolk of Tull; had not asked to shoot
Allie, with her sadly pretty face at the end marked by the secret
she had finally asked to be let in on, using that word, that nine-
teen, like a key in a lock; had not asked to be faced with a choice
between duty and flat-out murder. 
 It was not fair to ring in inno-
cent bystanders and make them speak lines they didn't under-
stand on a strange stage. 
 Allie,he thought, Allie was at least partof this world, in her own self-illusory way. 
 But this boy . 
. 
. 
 this
Goddamned boy . 
. 
. 
"Tell me what you can remember," he told Jake. 

"It's only a little. 
 It doesn't seem to make any sense anymore. 
"
"Tell me. 
 Maybe I can pick up the sense. 
"
The boy thought about how to begin. 
 He thought about it veryhard. 
 "There was a place . 
. 
. 
 the one before this one. 
 A high place
with lots of rooms and a patio where you could look at tall build-
ings and water. 
 There was a statue that stood in the water. 
""A statue in the water? 
"
"Yes. 
 A lady with a crown and a torch and . 
. 
. 
 I think . 
. 
. 
 abook. 
""Are you making this up? 
"
"I guess I must be," the boy said hopelessly. 
 "There werethings to ride in on the streets. 
 Big ones and little ones. 
 The big
ones were blue and white. 
 The little ones were yellow. 
 A lot of
yellow ones. 
 I walked to school. 
 There were cement paths beside
the streets. 
 Windows to look in and more statues wearing clothes. 

The statues sold the clothes. 
 I know it sounds crazy, but the stat-
ues sold the clothes. 
"

The gunslinger shook his head and looked for a lie on theboy's face. 
 He saw none. 
"I walked to school," the boy repeated doggedly. 
 "And I had a"-his eyes tilted closed and his lips moved gropingly-"a brown . 
. 
. 
 book . 
. 
. 
 bag. 
 I carried a lunch. 
 And I wore"-the
groping again, agonized groping-"a tie. 
""A cravat? 
"
"I don't know. 
" The boy's fingers made a slow, unconsciousclinching motion at his throat, one the gunslinger associated with
hanging. 
 "I don't know. 
 It's just all gone. 
" And he looked away. 
"May I put you to sleep? 
" the gunslinger asked. 

"I'm not sleepy. 
"
"I can make you sleepy, and I can make you remember. 
"
Doubtfully, Jake asked, "How could you do that? 
"
"With this. 
"
The gunslinger removed one of the shells from his gunbeltand twirled it in his fingers. 
 The movement was dexterous, as
flowing as oil. 
 The shell cartwheeled effortlessly from thumb and
index to index and second, to second and ring, to ring and pinky. 

It popped out of sight and reappeared; seemed to float briefly,
then reversed. 
 The shell walked across the gunslinger's fingers. 

The fingers themselves marched as his feet had marched on his
last miles to this place. 
 The boy watched, his initial doubt first
replaced with plain delight, then by raptness, then by dawning
blankness as he opened. 
 His eyes slipped shut. 
 The shell danced
back and forth. 
 Jake's eyes opened again, caught the steady,
limpid movement between the gunslinger's fingers a little while
longer, and then they closed once more. 
 The gunslinger continued
the howken, but Jake's eyes did not open again. 
 The boy breathed
with slow and steady calmness. 
 Did this have to be part of it? 
 Yes. 

It did. 
 There was a certain cold beauty to it, like the lacy frettings
that fringe hard blue ice-packs. 
 He once more seemed to hear his

mother singing, not the nonsense about the rain in Spain thistime, but sweeter nonsense, coming from a great distance as he
rocked on the rim of sleep: Baby-bunting, baby dear, baby bringyour basket here. 
Not for the first time the gunslinger tasted the smooth, lodentaste of soul-sickness. 
 The shell in his fingers, manipulated with
such unknown grace, was suddenly horrific, the spoor of a mon-
ster. 
 He dropped it into his palm, made a fist, and squeezed it with
painful force. 
 Had it exploded, in that moment he would have re-
joiced at the destruction of his talented hand, for its only true tal-
ent was murder. 
 There had always been murder in the world, but
telling himself so was no comfort. 
 There was murder, there was
rape, there were unspeakable practices, and all of them were for
the good, the bloody good, the bloody myth, for the grail, for the
Tower. 
 Ah, the Tower stood somewhere in the middle of things
(so they did say), rearing its black-gray bulk to the sky, and in his
desert-scoured ears, the gunslinger heard the faint sweet sound of
his mother's voice: Chussit, chissit, chassit, bring enough to fillyour basket. 
He brushed the song, and the sweetness of the song, aside. 
"Where are you? 
" he asked. 
IIIJake Chambers-sometimes 'Bama-is going downstairs with his
bookbag. 
 There is Earth Science, there is Geography, there is a
notepad, a pencil, a lunch his mother's cook, Mrs. 
 Greta Shaw,
has made for him in the chrome-and-Formica kitchen where a fan
whirrs eternally, sucking up alien odors. 
 In his lunch sack he has
a peanut butter and jelly sandwich; a bologna, lettuce, and onion

sandwich; and four Oreo cookies. 
 His parents do not hate him,but they do seem to have overlooked him. 
 They have abdicated
and left him to Mrs. 
 Greta Shaw, to nannies, to a tutor in the sum-
mer and The Piper School (which is Private and Nice, and most
of all, White) the rest of the time. 
 None of these people have ever
pretended to be more than what they are-professional people,
the best in their fields. 
 None have folded him to a particularly
warm bosom as usually happens in the historical romance novels
his mother reads and which Jake has dipped into, looking for the
"hot parts. 
" Hysterical novels, his father sometimes calls them,
and sometimes "bodice-rippers. 
"You should talk, his mother sayswith infinite scorn from behind some closed door where Jake lis-
tens. 
 His father works for The Network, and Jake could pick him
out of a line-up of skinny men with crewcuts. 
 Probably. 
Jake does not know that he hates all the professional peoplebut Mrs. 
 Shaw. 
 People have always bewildered him. 
 His mother,
who is scrawny in a sexy way, often goes to bed with sick friends. 

His father sometimes talks about people at The Network who are
doing "too much Coca-Cola. 
" This statement is always accompa-
nied by a humorless grin and a quick little sniff of the thumbnail. 
Now he is on the street, Jake Chambers is on the street, hehas "hit the bricks. 
" He is clean and well-mannered, comely, sen-
sitive. 
 He bowls once a week at Mid-Town Lanes. 
 He has no
friends, only acquaintances. 
 He has never bothered to think
about this, but it hurts him. 
 He does not know or understand that
a long association with professional people has caused him to
take on many of their traits. 
 Mrs. 
 Greta Shaw (better than the rest
of them, but gosh, is that ever a consolation prize) makes very
professional sandwiches. 
 She quarters them and cuts off the
breadcrusts so that when he eats in the gym period four he looks
like he ought to be at a cocktail party with a drink in his other

hand instead of a sports novel or a Clay Blaisdell Western fromthe school library. 
 His father makes a great deal of money be-
cause he is a master of "the kill"-that is, placing a stronger
show on his Network against a weaker show on a rival Network. 

His father smokes four packs of cigarettes a day. 
 His father does
not cough, but he has a hard grin, and he's not averse to the oc-
casional shot of the old Coca-Cola. 
Down the street. 
 His mother leaves cab fare, but he walksevery day it doesn't rain, swinging his bookbag (and sometimes
his bowling bag, although mostly he leaves it in his locker), a
small boy who looks very American with his blond hair and blue
eyes. 
 Girls have already begun to notice him (with their mothers'
approval), and he does not shy away with skittish little-boy arro-
gance. 
 He talks to them with unknowing professionalism and puz-
zles them away. 
 He likes geography and bowling in the afternoon. 

His father owns stock in a company that makes automatic pin-
setting machinery, but Mid-Town Lanes does not use his father's
brand. 
 He does not think he has thought about this, but he has. 
Walking down the street, he passes Bloomie's, where the mod-els stand dressed in fur coats, in six-button Edwardian suits,
some in nothing at all; some are "barenaked. 
" These models-
thesemannequins-are perfectly professional, and he hates allprofessionalism. 
 He is too young to have learned to hate himself
yet, but that seed is already there; given time, it will grow, and
bear bitter fruit. 
He comes to the corner and stands with his bookbag at hisside. 
 Traffic roars by-grunting blue-and-white busses, yellow
taxis, Volkswagens, a large truck. 
 He is just a boy, but not aver-
age, and he sees the man who kills him out of the corner of his
eye. 
 It is the man in black, and he doesn't see the face, only the
swirling robe, the outstretched hands, and the hard, professional

grin. 
 He falls into the street with his arms outstretched, not let-ting go of the bookbag which contains Mrs. 
 Greta Shaw's ex-
tremely professional lunch. 
 There is a brief glance through a
polarized windshield at the horrified face of a businessman wear-
ing a dark-blue hat in the band of which is a small, jaunty feather. 

Somewhere a radio is blasting rock and roll. 
 An old woman on 
the far curb screams-she is wearing a black hat with a net. 

Nothing jaunty about that black net; it is like a mourner's veil. 

Jake feels nothing but surprise and his usual sense of headlong
bewilderment-is this how it ends? 
 Before he's bowled better
than two-seventy? 
 He lands hard in the street and looks at an
asphalt-sealed crack some two inches from his eyes. 
 The bookbag
is jolted from his hand. 
 He is wondering if he has skinned his
knees when the car belonging to the businessman wearing the
blue hat with the jaunty feather passes over him. 
 It is a big blue
1976 Cadillac with whitewall Firestone tires. 
 The car is almost
exactly the same color as the businessman's hat. 
 It breaks Jake's
back, mushes his guts to gravy, and sends blood from his mouth in
a high-pressure jet. 
 He turns his head and sees the Cadillac's
flaming taillights and smoke spurting from beneath its locked
rear wheels. 
 The car has also run over his bookbag and left a
wide black tread on it. 
 He turns his head the other way and sees a
large gray Ford screaming to a stop inches from his body. 
 A black
fellow who has been selling pretzels and sodas from a pushcart is
coming toward him on the run. 
 Blood runs from Jake's nose, ears,
eyes, rectum. 
 His genitals have been squashed. 
 He wonders irri-
tably how badly he has skinned his knees. 
 He wonders if he'll be
late for school. 
 Now the driver of the Cadillac is running toward
him, babbling. 
 Somewhere a terrible, calm voice, the voice of doom,
says: "I am a priest. 
 Let me through. 
 An Act of Contrition . 
. 
. 
"He sees the black robe and knows sudden horror. 
 It is him, the

man in black. 
 Jake turns his face away with the last of hisstrength. 
 Somewhere a radio is playing a song by the rock group
Kiss. 
 He sees his own hand trailing on the pavement, small,
white, shapely. 
 He has never bitten his nails. 
Looking at his hand, Jake dies. 
IVThe gunslinger hunkered in frowning thought. 
 He was tired and
his body ached and the thoughts came with aggravating slowness. 

Across from him the amazing boy slept with his hands folded in
his lap, still breathing calmly. 
 He had told his tale without much
emotion, although his voice had trembled near the end, when he
had come to the part about the "priest" and the "Act of Contri-
tion. 
" He had not, of course, told the gunslinger about his family
and his own sense of bewildered dichotomy, but that had seeped
through anyway-enough for the gunslinger to make out its
shape. 
 The fact that there had never been such a city as the boy
described (unless it was the mythic city of Lud) was not the most
upsetting part of the story, but it was disturbing. 
 It was all dis-
turbing. 
 The gunslinger was afraid of the implications. 
"Jake? 
"
"Uh-huh? 
"
"Do you want to remember this when you wake up, or for-get it? 
""Forget it," the boy said promptly. 
 "When the blood came outof my mouth I could taste my own shit. 
""All right. 
 You're going to sleep, understand? 
 Real sleep now. 
Go ahead and lie over, if it do please ya. 
"Jake laid over, looking small and peaceful and harmless. 
 The

gunslinger did not believe he was harmless. 
 There was a deadlyfeeling about him, the stink of yet another trap. 
 He didn't like the
feeling, but he liked the boy. 
 He liked him a great deal. 
"Jake? 
"
"Shhh. 
 I'm sleeping. 
 I want to sleep. 
"
"Yes. 
 And when you wake up you won't remember any ofthis. 
""'Kay. 
 Good. 
"
The gunslinger watched him for a brief time, thinking of his own boyhood, which usually seemed to have happened to an-
other person-to a person who had leaped through some fabulous 
lens of time to become someone else-but which now seemed
poignantly close. 
 It was very hot in the stable of the way station,
and he carefully drank some more water. 
 He got up and walked to
the back of the building, pausing to look into one of the horse
stalls. 
 There was a small pile of white hay in the corner, and a
neatly folded blanket, but there was no smell of horse. 
 There was
no smell of anything in the stable. 
 The sun had bled away every
smell and left nothing. 
 The air was perfectly neutral. 
At the back of the stable was a small, dark room with a stain-less steel machine in the center. 
 It was untouched by rust or rot. 
 It
looked like a butter churn. 
 At the left, a chrome pipe jutted from
it, terminating over a drain in the floor. 
 The gunslinger had seen
pumps like it in other dry places, but never one so big. 
 He could
not contemplate how deep they (some long-gone they) must have
drilled before they struck water, secret and forever black under
the desert. 
Why hadn't they removed the pump when the way station hadbeen abandoned? 
Demons, perhaps. 

He shuddered abruptly, an abrupt twisting of his back. 
 Heat-

flesh poked out on his skin, then receded. 
 He went to the controlswitch and pushed the ON button. 
 The machine began to hum. 

After perhaps half a minute, a stream of cool, clear water belched
from the pipe and went down the drain to be recirculated. 
 Perhaps
three gallons flowed out of the pipe before the pump shut itself
down with a final click. 
 It was a thing as alien to this place and
time as true love, and yet as concrete as a Judgment, a silent re-
minder of the time when the world had not yet moved on. 
 It
probably ran on an atomic slug, as there was no electricity within
a thousand miles of here and even dry batteries would have lost
their charge long ago. 
 It had been made by a company called
North Central Positronics. 
 The gunslinger didn't like it. 
He went back and sat down beside the boy, who had put onehand under his cheek. 
 Nice-looking boy. 
 The gunslinger drank
some more water and crossed his legs so he was sitting Indian
fashion. 
 The boy, like the squatter on the edge of the desert who
kept the bird (Zoltan, the gunslinger remembered abruptly, the
bird's name was Zoltan), had lost his sense of time, but the fact
that the man in black was closer seemed beyond doubt. 
 Not for
the first time, the gunslinger wondered if the man in black was
letting him catch up for some reason of his own. 
 Perhaps the gun-
slinger was playing into his hands. 
 He tried to imagine what the
confrontation might be like, and could not. 
He was very hot, but no longer felt sick. 
 The nursery rhymeoccurred to him again, but this time instead of his mother, he
thought of Cort-Cort, an ageless engine of a man, his face
stitched with the scars of bricks and bullets and blunt instru-
ments. 
 The scars of war and instruction in the arts of war. 
 He
wondered if Cort had ever had a love to match those monumental
scars. 
 He doubted it. 
 He thought of Susan, and his mother, and of
Marten, that incomplete enchanter. 
The gunslinger was not a man to dwell on the past; only a

shadowy conception of the future and of his own emotionalmake-up saved him from being a man without imagination, a
dangerous dullard. 
 His present run of thought therefore rather
amazed him. 
 Each name called up others-Cuthbert, Alain, the
old man Jonas with his quavery voice; and again Susan, the
lovely girl at the window. 
 Such thoughts always came back to Su-
san, and the great rolling plain known as the Drop, and fishermen
casting their nets in the bays on the edge of the Clean Sea. 
The piano player in Tull (also dead, all dead in Tull, and by hishand) had known those places, although he and the gunslinger
had only spoken of them that once. 
 Sheb had been fond of the old
songs, had once played them in a saloon called the Traveller's
Rest, and the gunslinger hummed one tunelessly under his breath:Love o love o careless love
See what careless love has done. 
The gunslinger laughed, bemused. 
 I am the last of that greenand warm-hued world. 
And for all his nostalgia, he felt no self-pity. 
 The world had moved on mercilessly, but his legs were 
still strong, and the man in black was closer. 
 The gunslinger nod-
ded out. 
VWhen he awoke, it was almost dark and the boy was gone. 
The gunslinger got up, hearing his joints pop, and went to thestable door. 
 There was a small flame dancing in darkness on the
porch of the inn. 
 He walked toward it, his shadow long and black
and trailing in the reddish-ochre light of sunset. 
Jake was sitting by a kerosene lamp. 
 "The oil was in a drum,"

he said, "but I was scared to burn it in the house. 
 Everything's so dry-""You did just right. 
" The gunslinger sat down, seeing but notthinking about the dust of years that puffed up around his rump. 

He thought it something of a wonder that the porch didn't simply
collapse beneath their combined weight. 
 The flame from the lamp
shadowed the boy's face with delicate tones. 
 The gunslinger pro-
duced his poke and rolled a cigarette. 
"We have to palaver," he said. 

Jake nodded, smiling a little at the word. 

"I guess you know I'm on the prod for that man you saw. 
"
"Are you going to kill him? 
"
"I don't know. 
 I have to make him tell me something. 
 I mayhave to make him take me someplace. 
""Where? 
"
"To find a tower," the gunslinger said. 
 He held his cigaretteover the chimney of the lamp and drew on it; the smoke drifted
away on the rising night breeze. 
 Jake watched it. 
 His face showed
neither fear nor curiosity, certainly not enthusiasm. 
"So I'm going on tomorrow," the gunslinger said. 
 "You'llhave to come with me. 
 How much of that meat is left? 
""Only a little. 
"
"Corn? 
"
"A little more. 
"
The gunslinger nodded. 
 "Is there a cellar? 
"
"Yes. 
" Jake looked at him. 
 The pupils of his eyes had grownto a huge, fragile size. 
 "You pull up on a ring in the floor, but 
I didn't go down. 
 I was afraid the ladder would break and I
wouldn't be able to get up again. 
 And it smells bad. 
 It's the only
thing around here that smells at all. 
""We'll get up early and see if there's anything down thereworth taking. 
 Then we'll go. 
"

"All right. 
" The boy paused and then said, "I'm glad I didn'tkill you when you were sleeping. 
 I had a pitchfork and I thoughtabout doing it. 
 But I didn't, and now I won't have to be afraid to
go to sleep. 
""What would you be afraid of? 
"
The boy looked at him ominously. 
 "Spooks. 
 Of himcomingback. 
""The man in black," the gunslinger said. 
 Not a question. 

"Yes. 
 Is he a bad man? 
"
"I guess that depends on where you're standing," the gun-slinger said absently. 
 He got up and pitched his cigarette out onto
the hardpan. 
 "I'm going to sleep. 
"The boy looked at him timidly. 
 "Can I sleep in the stable with you? 
""Of course. 
"
The gunslinger stood on the steps, looking up, and the boyjoined him. 
 Old Star was up there, and Old Mother. 
 It seemed to
the gunslinger that if he closed his eyes he would be able to hear
the croaking of the first spring peepers, smell the green, almost-
summer smell of the court lawns after their first cutting (and hear,
perhaps, the indolent click of wooden balls as the ladies of the
East Wing, attired only in their shifts as dusk glimmered toward
dark, played at Points), could almost see Cuthbert and Jamie as
they came through the break in the hedges, calling for him to ride
out with them . 
. 
. 
It was not like him to think so much of the past. 

He turned back and picked up the lamp. 
 "Let's go to sleep,"he said. 
They crossed to the stable together. 


VIThe next morning he explored the cellar. 
Jake was right; it smelled bad. 
 It had a wet, swampy stenchthat made the gunslinger feel nauseous and a little lightheaded af-ter the antiseptic odorlessness of the desert and the stable. 
 The
cellar smelled of cabbages and turnips and potatoes with long,
sightless eyes gone to everlasting rot. 
 The ladder, however,
seemed quite sturdy, and he climbed down. 
The floor was earthen, and his head almost touched the over-head beams. 
 Down here spiders still lived, disturbingly big ones
with mottled gray bodies. 
 Many were muties, the true thread
long-lost. 
 Some had eyes on stalks, some had what might have
been as many as sixteen legs. 
The gunslinger peered around and waited for his nighteyes. 

"You all right? 
" Jake called down nervously. 

"Yes. 
" He focused on the corner. 
 "There are cans. 
 Wait. 
"
He went carefully to the corner, ducking his head. 
 There wasan old box with one side folded down. 
 The cans were vegetables-
green beans, yellow beans-and three cans of corned beef. 
He scooped up an armload and went back to the ladder. 
 Heclimbed halfway up and handed them to Jake, who knelt to re-
ceive them. 
 He went back for more. 
It was on the third trip that he heard the groaning in thefoundations. 
He turned, looked, and felt a kind of dreamy terror wash overhim, a feeling both languid and repellent. 
The foundation was composed of huge sandstone blocks thathad probably been evenly cornered when the way station was
new, but which were now at every zigzag, drunken angle. 
 It made
the wall look as if it were inscribed with strange, meandering hieroglyphics. 

And from the joining of two of these abstruse cracks,a thin spill of sand was running, as if something on the other side
was digging itself through with slobbering, agonized intensity. 
The groaning rose and fell, becoming louder, until the wholecellar was full of the sound, an abstract noise of ripping pain and
dreadful effort. 
"Come up! 
" Jake screamed. 
 "Oh Jesus, mister, come up! 
"
"Go away," the gunslinger said calmly. 
 "Wait outside. 
 If Idon't come up by the time you count to two . 
. 
. 
 no, three hundred,
get the hell out. 
""Come up! 
"Jake screamed again. 
The gunslinger didn't answer. 
 He pulled leather with his righthand. 
There was a hole as big as a coin in the wall now. 
 He couldhear, through the curtain of his own terror, Jake's pattering feet as
the boy ran. 
 Then the spill of sand stopped. 
 The groaning ceased,
but there was a sound of steady, labored breathing. 
"Who are you? 
" the gunslinger asked. 

No answer. 

And in the High Speech, his voice filling with the old thunderof command, Roland demanded: "Who are you, Demon? 
 Speak,
if you would speak. 
 My time is short; my patience shorter. 
""Go slow," a dragging, clotted voice said from within thewall. 
 And the gunslinger felt the dream-like terror deepen and
grow almost solid. 
 It was the voice of Alice, the woman he had
stayed with in the town of Tull. 
 But she was dead; he had seen her
go down himself, a bullet hole between her eyes. 
 Fathoms seemed
to swim by his eyes, descending. 
 "Go slow past the Drawers, gun-
slinger. 
 Watch for the taheen. 
 While you travel with the boy, the
man in black travels with your soul in his pocket. 
""What do you mean? 
 Speak on! 
"

But the breathing was gone. 
The gunslinger stood for a moment, frozen, and then one ofthe huge spiders dropped on his arm and scrambled frantically up
to his shoulder. 
 With an involuntary grunt he brushed it away and
got his feet moving. 
 He did not want to do the next thing, but cus-
tom was strict, inviolable. 
 Take the dead from the dead, the old
proverb said; only a corpse may speak true prophecy. 
 He went to
the hole and punched at it. 
 The sandstone crumbled easily at the
edges, and with a bare stiffening of muscles, he thrust his hand
through the wall. 
And touched something solid, with raised and fretted knobs. 
He drew it out. 
 He held a jawbone, rotted at the far hinge. 
 The
teeth leaned this way and that. 
"All right," he said softly. 
 He thrust it rudely into his backpocket and went back up the ladder, carrying the last cans awk-
wardly. 
 He left the trapdoor open. 
 The sun would get in and kill
the mutie spiders. 
Jake was halfway across the stable yard, cowering on thecracked, rubbly hardpan. 
 He screamed when he saw the gun-
slinger, backed away a step or two, and then ran to him, crying. 
"I thought it got you, that it got you. 
 I thought-"
"It didn't. 
 Nothing got me. 
" He held the boy to him, feelinghis face, hot against his chest, and his hands, dry against his
ribcage. 
 He could feel the rapid beating of the boy's heart. 
 It oc-
curred to him later that this was when he began to love the boy-
which was, of course, what the man in black must have planned
all along. 
 Was there ever a trap to match the trap of love? 
"Was it a demon? 
" The voice was muffled. 

"Yes. 
 A speaking-demon. 
 We don't have to go back there any-more. 
 Come on. 
 Let's shake a mile. 
"They went to the stable, and the gunslinger made a rough

pack from the blanket he'd slept under-it was hot and prickly,but there was nothing else. 
 That done, he filled the waterbags
from the pump. 
"You carry one of the waterbags," the gunslinger said. 
 "Wearit around your shoulders-see? 
""Yes. 
" The boy looked up at him worshipfully, the lookquickly masked. 
 He slung one of the bags over his shoulders. 
"Is it too heavy? 
"
"No. 
 It's fine. 
"
"Tell me the truth, now. 
 I can't carry you if you get asunstroke. 
""I won't have a sunstroke. 
 I'll be okay. 
"
The gunslinger nodded. 

"We're going to the mountains, aren't we? 
"
"Yes. 
"
They walked out into the steady smash of the sun. 
 Jake, hishead as high as the swing of the gunslinger's elbows, walked to
his right and a little ahead, the rawhide-wrapped ends of the
waterbag hanging nearly to his shins. 
 The gunslinger had criss-
crossed two more waterbags across his shoulders and carried the
sling of food in his armpit, his left arm holding it against his
body. 
 In his right hand was his pack, his poke, and the rest of his
gunna. 
They passed through the far gate of the way station and foundthe blurred ruts of the stage track again. 
 They had walked perhaps
fifteen minutes when Jake turned around and waved at the two
buildings. 
 They seemed to huddle in the titanic space of the
desert. 
"Goodbye! 
" Jake cried. 
 "Goodbye! 
" Then he turned back tothe gunslinger, looking troubled. 
 "I feel like something's watch-
ing us. 
"

"Something or someone," the gunslinger agreed. 
"Was someone hiding there? 
 Hiding there all along? 
"
"I don't know. 
 I don't think so. 
"
"Should we go back? 
 Go back and-"
"No. 
 We're done with that place. 
"
"Good," Jake said fervently. 

They walked. 
 The stage track breasted a frozen sand drumlin,and when the gunslinger looked around, the way station was
gone. 
 Once again there was the desert, and that only. 
VIIThey were three days out of the way station; the mountains were
deceptively clear now. 
 They could see the smooth, stepped rise of
the desert into foothills, the first naked slopes, the bedrock burst-
ing through the skin of the earth in sullen, eroded triumph. 
 Fur-
ther up, the land gentled off briefly again, and for the first time 
in months or years the gunslinger could see real, living green. 

Grass, dwarf spruces, perhaps even willows, all fed by snow
runoff from further up. 
 Beyond that the rock took over again, ris-
ing in cyclopean, tumbled splendor all the way to the blinding
snowcaps. 
 Off to the left, a huge slash showed the way to the
smaller, eroded sandstone cliffs and mesas and buttes on the far
side. 
 This draw was obscured in the almost continual gray mem-
brane of showers. 
 At night, Jake would sit fascinated for the few
minutes before he fell into sleep, watching the brilliant sword-
play of the far-off lightning, white and purple, startling in the
clarity of the night air. 
The boy was fine on the trail. 
 He was tough, but more thanthat, he seemed to fight exhaustion with a calm reservoir of will



which the gunslinger appreciated and admired. 
 He didn't talkmuch and he didn't ask questions, not even about the jawbone,
which the gunslinger turned over and over in his hands during his
evening smoke. 
 He caught a sense that the boy felt highly flat-
tered by the gunslinger's companionship-perhaps even exalted
by it-and this disturbed him. 
 The boy had been placed in his
path-While you travel with the boy, the man in black travels withyour soul in his pocket-and the fact that Jake was not slowinghim down only opened the way to more sinister possibilities. 
They passed the symmetrical campfire leavings of the man inblack at regular intervals, and it seemed to the gunslinger that
these leavings were much fresher now. 
 On the third night, the
gunslinger was sure that he could see the distant spark of another
campfire, somewhere in the first rising swell of the foothills. 
 This
did not please him as much as he once might have believed. 
 One
of Cort's sayings occurred to him: 'Ware the man who fakes alimp. 
Near two o'clock on the fourth day out from the way station,Jake reeled and almost fell. 
"Here, sit down," the gunslinger said. 

"No, I'm okay. 
"
"Sit down. 
"
The boy sat obediently. 
 The gunslinger squatted close by, soJake would be in his shadow. 
"Drink. 
"
"I'm not supposed to until-"
"Drink. 
"
The boy drank, three swallows. 
 The gunslinger wet the tail of the blanket, which held a good deal less now, and applied 
the damp fabric to the boy's wrists and forehead, which were
fever-dry. 


"From now on we rest every afternoon at this time. 
 Fifteenminutes. 
 Do you want to sleep? 
""No. 
" The boy looked at him with shame. 
 The gunslingerlooked back blandly. 
 In an abstracted way he withdrew one of thebullets from his belt and began to twirl it howken between his fin-
gers. 
 The boy watched, fascinated. 
"That's neat," he said. 

The gunslinger nodded. 
 "Yar! 
" He paused. 
 "When I was yourage, I lived in a walled city, did I tell you that? 
"The boy shook his head sleepily. 

"Sure. 
 And there was an evil man-"
"The priest? 
"
"Well, sometimes I wonder about that, tell you true," the gun-slinger said. 
 "If they weretwo, I think now they must have beenbrothers. 
 Maybe even twins. 
 But did I ever see 'em together? 
 No,
I never did. 
 This bad man . 
. 
. 
 this Marten . 
. 
. 
 he was a wizard. 

Like Merlin. 
 Do they ken Merlin where you come from? 
""Merlin and Arthur and the knights of the Round Table," Jakesaid dreamily. 
The gunslinger felt a nasty jolt go through him. 
 "Yes," he said. 
"Arthur Eld, you say true, I say thank ya. 
 I was very young . 
. 
. 
"But the boy was asleep sitting up, his hands folded neatly inhis lap. 
"Jake. 
"
"Yar! 
"
The sound of this word from the boy's mouth startled himbadly, but the gunslinger wouldn't let his voice show it. 
 "When I
snap my fingers, you'll wake up. 
 You'll be rested and fresh. 
 Do
you kennit? 
""Yes. 
"
"Lie over, then. 
"

The gunslinger got makings from his poke and rolled a ciga-rette. 
 There was something missing. 
 He searched for it in his dili-gent, careful way and located it. 
 The missing thing was his
previous maddening sense of hurry, the feeling that he might be
left behind at any time, that the trail would die out and he would
be left with only a last fading footprint. 
 All that was gone now,
and the gunslinger was slowly becoming sure that the man in
black wanted to be caught. 
 'Ware the man who fakes a limp. 
What would follow? 

The question was too vague to catch his interest. 
 Cuthbertwould have found interest in it, lively interest (and probably a
joke), but Cuthbert was as gone as the Horn o'Deschain, and the
gunslinger could only go forward in the way he knew. 
He watched the boy as he smoked, and his mind turned backon Cuthbert, who had always laughed (to his death he had gone
laughing), and Cort, who never laughed, and on Marten, who
sometimes smiled-a thin, silent smile that had its own disquiet-
ing gleam . 
. 
. 
 like an eye that slips open in the dark and discloses
blood. 
 And there had been the falcon, of course. 
 The falcon was
named David, after the legend of the boy with the sling. 
 David, he
was quite sure, knew nothing but the need for murder, rending,
and terror. 
 Like the gunslinger himself. 
 David was no dilettante;
he played the center of the court. 
Except maybe at the end. 

The gunslinger's stomach seemed to rise painfully against hisheart, but his face didn't change. 
 He watched the smoke of his
cigarette rise into the hot desert air and disappear, and his mind
went back. 


VIIIThe sky was white, perfectly white, the smell of rain strong in theair. 
 The smell of hedges and growing green was sweet. 
 It was
deep spring, what some called New Earth. 
David sat on Cuthbert's arm, a small engine of destructionwith bright golden eyes that glared outward at nothing. 
 The
rawhide leash attached to his jesses was looped carelessly about
Bert's arm. 
Cort stood aside from the two boys, a silent figure in patchedleather trousers and a green cotton shirt that had been cinched
high with his old, wide infantry belt. 
 The green of his shirt
merged with the hedges and the rolling turf of the Back Courts,
where the ladies had not yet begun to play at Points. 
"Get ready," Roland whispered to Cuthbert. 

"We're ready," Cuthbert said confidently. 
 "Aren't we, Davey? 
"
They spoke the low speech, the language of both scullionsand squires; the day when they would be allowed to use their own
tongue in the presence of others was still far. 
 "It's a beautiful day
for it. 
 Can you smell the rain? 
 It's-"Cort abruptly raised the trap in his hands and let the side fallopen. 
 The dove was out and up, trying for the sky in a quick, flut-
tering blast of its wings. 
 Cuthbert pulled the leash, but he was
slow; the hawk was already up and his takeoff was awkward. 
 The
hawk recovered with a brief twitch of its wings. 
 It struck upward,
trudging the air, gaining altitude over the dove, moving bullet-
swift. 
Cort walked over to where the boys stood, casually, andswung his huge and twisted fist at Cuthbert's ear. 
 The boy fell
over without a sound, although his lips writhed back from his
gums. 
 A trickle of blood flowed slowly from his ear and onto the
rich green grass. 


"You were slow, maggot," he said. 
Cuthbert was struggling to his feet. 
 "I cry your pardon, Cort. 
It's just that I-"Cort swung again, and Cuthbert fell over again. 
 The bloodflowed more swiftly now. 
"Speak the High Speech," he said softly. 
 His voice was flat,with a slight, drunken rasp. 
 "Speak your Act of Contrition in the
speech of civilization for which better men than you will ever be
have died, maggot. 
"Cuthbert was getting up again. 
 Tears stood brightly in hiseyes, but his lips were pressed together in a tight line of hate
which did not quiver. 
"I grieve," Cuthbert said in a voice of breathless control. 
 "Ihave forgotten the face of my father, whose guns I hope someday
to bear. 
""That's right, brat," Cort said. 
 "You'll consider what you didwrong, and sharpen your reflections with hunger. 
 No supper. 
 No
breakfast. 
""Look! 
" Roland cried. 
 He pointed up. 

The hawk had climbed above the soaring dove. 
 It glided for amoment, its stubby wings outstretched and without movement on
the still, white spring air. 
 Then it folded its wings and dropped
like a stone. 
 The two bodies came together, and for a moment
Roland fancied he could see blood in the air. 
 The hawk gave a
brief scream of triumph. 
 The dove fluttered, twisting, to the
ground, and Roland ran toward the kill, leaving Cort and the
chastened Cuthbert behind him. 
The hawk had landed beside its prey and was complacentlytearing into its plump white breast. 
 A few feathers seesawed
slowly downward. 
"David! 
" the boy yelled, and tossed the hawk a piece of rabbitflesh from his poke. 
 The hawk caught it on the fly, ingested it with

an upward shaking of its back and throat, and Roland attemptedto re-leash the bird. 
The hawk whirled, almost absentmindedly, and ripped skinfrom Roland's arm in a long, dangling gash. 
 Then it went back to
its meal. 
With a grunt, Roland looped the leash again, this time catch-ing David's diving, slashing beak on the leather gauntlet he wore. 

He gave the hawk another piece of meat, then hooded it. 
 Docilely,
David climbed onto his wrist. 
He stood up proudly, the hawk on his arm. 

"What's this, can ya tell me? 
" Cort asked, pointing to thedripping slash on Roland's forearm. 
 The boy stationed himself to
receive the blow, locking his throat against any possible cry, but
no blow fell. 
"He struck me," Roland said. 

"You pissed him off," Cort said. 
 "The hawk does not fear you,boy, and the hawk never will. 
 The hawk is God's gunslinger. 
"Roland merely looked at Cort. 
 He was not an imaginativeboy, and if Cort had intended to imply a moral, it was lost on him;
he went so far as to believe that it might have been one of the few
foolish statements he had ever heard Cort make. 
Cuthbert came up behind them and stuck his tongue out atCort, safely on his blind side. 
 Roland did not smile, but nodded 
to him. 
"Go in now," Cort said, taking the hawk. 
 He turned andpointed at Cuthbert. 
 "But remember your reflection, maggot. 
 And
your fast. 
 Tonight and tomorrow morning. 
""Yes," Cuthbert said, stiltedly formal now. 
 "Thank you forthis instructive day. 
""You learn," Cort said, "but your tongue has a bad habit oflolling from your stupid mouth when your instructor's back is
turned. 
 Mayhap the day will come when it and you will learn

their respective places. 
" He struck Cuthbert again, this timesolidly between the eyes and hard enough so that Roland heard a
dull thud-the sound a mallet makes when a scullion taps a keg
of beer. 
 Cuthbert fell backward onto the lawn, his eyes cloudy
and dazed at first. 
 Then they cleared and he stared burningly up at
Cort, his usual easy grin nowhere to be seen, his hatred unveiled,
a pinprick as bright as the dove's blood in the center of each eye. 

He nodded and parted his lips in a scarifying smile that Roland
had never seen. 
"Then there's hope for you," Cort said. 
 "When you think youcan, you come for me, maggot. 
""How did you know? 
" Cuthbert said between his teeth. 

Cort turned toward Roland so swiftly that Roland almost fellback a step-and then both of them would have been on the
grass, decorating the new green with their blood. 
 "I saw it re-
flected in this maggot's eyes," he said. 
 "Remember it, Cuthbert
Allgood. 
 Last lesson for today. 
"Cuthbert nodded again, the same frightening smile on hisface. 
 "I grieve," he said. 
 "I have forgotten the face-""Cut that shit," Cort said, losing interest. 
 He turned toRoland. 
 "Go on, now. 
 The both of you. 
 If I have to look at your
stupid maggot faces any longer I'll puke my guts and lose a good
dinner. 
""Come on," Roland said. 

Cuthbert shook his head to clear it and got to his feet. 
 Cortwas already walking down the hill in his squat, bowlegged stride,
looking powerful and somehow prehistoric. 
 The shaved and griz-
zled spot at the top of his head glimmered. 
"I'll kill the son of a bitch," Cuthbert said, still smiling. 
 Alarge goose egg, purple and knotted, was rising mystically on his
forehead. 
"Not you or me," Roland said, suddenly bursting into a grin. 


"You can have supper in the west kitchen with me. 
 Cook will giveus some. 
""He'll tell Cort. 
"
"He's no friend of Cort's," Roland said, and then shrugged. 
"And what if he did? 
"Cuthbert grinned back. 
 "Sure. 
 Right. 
 I always wanted toknow how the world looked when your head was on backwards
and upside down. 
"They started back together over the green lawns, castingshadows in the fine white springlight. 
IXThe cook in the west kitchen was named Hax. 
 He stood huge in
foodstained whites, a man with a crude-oil complexion whose an-
cestry was a quarter black, a quarter yellow, a quarter from the
South Islands, now almost forgotten (the world had moved on),
and a quarter gods-knew-what. 
 He shuffled about three high-
ceilinged steamy rooms like a tractor in low gear, wearing huge,
Caliph-like slippers. 
 He was one of those quite rare adults who
communicate with small children fairly well and who love them
all impartially-not in a sugary way but in a business-like fash-
ion that may sometimes entail a hug, in the same way that closing
a big business deal may call for a handshake. 
 He even loved the
boys who had begun the way of the gun, although they were dif-
ferent from other children-undemonstrative and always slightly
dangerous, not in an adult way, but rather as if they were ordinary
children with a slight touch of madness-and Bert was not the
first of Cort's students whom he had fed on the sly. 
 At this mo-
ment he stood in front of his huge, rambling electric stove-one

of six working appliances left on the whole estate. 
 It was hispersonal domain, and he stood there watching the two boys bolt
the gravied meat scraps he had produced. 
 Behind, before, and 
all around, cookboys, scullions, and various underlings rushed
through the steaming, humid air, rattling pans, stirring stew, slav-
ing over potatoes and vegetables in nether regions. 
 In the dimly lit
pantry alcove, a washerwoman with a doughy, miserable face and
hair caught up in a rag splashed water around on the floor with 
a mop. 
One of the scullery boys rushed up with a man from theGuards in tow. 
 "This man, he wantchoo, Hax. 
""All right. 
" Hax nodded to the Guard, and he nodded back. 
"You boys," he said. 
 "Go over to Maggie, she'll give you some
pie. 
 Then scat. 
 Don't get me in trouble. 
"Later they would both remember he'd said that: Don't get mein trouble. 
They nodded and went over to Maggie, who gave them hugewedges of pie on dinner plates-but gingerly, as if they were wild
dogs that might bite her. 
"Let's eat it understairs," Cuthbert said. 

"All right. 
"
They sat behind a huge, sweating stone colonnade, out ofsight of the kitchen, and gobbled their pie with their fingers. 
 It
was only moments later that they saw shadows fall on the far
curving wall of the wide staircase. 
 Roland grabbed Cuthbert's
arm. 
 "Come on," he said. 
 "Someone's coming. 
" Cuthbert looked
up, his face surprised and berry-stained. 
But the shadows stopped, still out of sight. 
 It was Hax and theman from the Guards. 
 The boys sat where they were. 
 If they
moved now, they might be heard. 
". 
. 
. 
 the good man," the Guard was saying. 


"Farson? 
""In two weeks," the Guard replied. 
 "Maybe three. 
 You have tocome with us. 
 There's a shipment from the freight depot . 
. 
. 
" A
particularly loud crash of pots and pans and a volley of catcalls
directed at the hapless potboy who had dropped them blotted out
some of the rest; then the boys heard the Guard finish: ". 
. 
. 
 poi-
soned meat. 
""Risky. 
"
"Ask not what the good man can do for you-" the Guardbegan. 
"But what you can do for him. 
" Hax sighed. 
 "Soldier, ask not. 
"
"You know what it could mean," the Guard said quietly. 

"Yar. 
 And I know my responsibilities to him; you don't needto lecture me. 
 I love him just as you do. 
 Would foller him into the
sea if he asked; so I would. 
""All right. 
 The meat will be marked for short-term storage inyour coldrooms. 
 But you'll have to be quick. 
 You must under-
stand that. 
""There are children in Taunton? 
" the cook asked. 
 It was notreally a question. 
"Children everywhere," the Guard said gently. 
 "It's the chil-dren we-and he-care about. 
""Poisoned meat. 
 Such a strange way to care for children. 
"Hax uttered a heavy, whistling sigh. 
 "Will they curdle and hold
their bellies and cry for their mammas? 
 I suppose they will. 
""It will be like going to sleep," the Guard said, but his voicewas too confidently reasonable. 
"Of course," Hax said, and laughed. 

"You said it yourself. 
 "Soldier, ask not. 
'Do you enjoy seeingchildren under the rule of the gun, when they could be under his
hands, ready to start making a new world? 
"

Hax did not reply. 
"I go on duty in twenty minutes," the Guard said, his voiceonce more calm. 
 "Give me a joint of mutton and I'll pinch one of
your girls and make her giggle. 
 When I leave-""My mutton will give no cramps to your belly, Robeson. 
"
"Will you . 
. 
. 
" But the shadows moved away and the voiceswere lost. 
I could have killed them,Roland thought, frozen and fasci-nated. 
 I could have killed them both with my knife, slit theirthroats like hogs. 
He looked at his hands, now stained with gravyand berries as well as dirt from the day's lessons. 
"Roland. 
"
He looked at Cuthbert. 
 They looked at each other for a longmoment in the fragrant semidarkness, and a taste of warm despair
rose in Roland's throat. 
 What he felt might have been a sort of
death-something as brutal and final as the death of the dove in
the white sky over the games field. 
 Hax? 
he thought, bewildered. 
Hax who put a poultice on my leg that time? 
 Hax? 
And then hismind snapped closed, cutting the subject off. 
What he saw, even in Cuthbert's humorous, intelligent face,was nothing-nothing at all. 
 Cuthbert's eyes were flat with Hax's
doom. 
 In Cuthbert's eyes, it had already happened. 
 He had fed
them and they had gone understairs to eat and then Hax had
brought the Guard named Robeson to the wrong corner of the
kitchen for their treasonous little tete-a-tete. 
Ka had worked as kasometimes did, as suddenly as a big stone rolling down a hillside. 

That was all. 
Cuthbert's eyes were gunslinger's eyes. 


XRoland's father was only just back from the uplands, and helooked out of place amid the drapes and the chiffon fripperies of
the main receiving hall to which the boy had only lately been
granted access, as a sign of his apprenticeship. 
Steven Deschain was dressed in black jeans and a blue workshirt. 
 His cloak, dusty and streaked, torn to the lining in one
place, was slung carelessly over his shoulder with no regard for
the way it and he clashed with the elegance of the room. 
 He was
desperately thin and the heavy handlebar mustache below his
nose seemed to weight his head as he looked down at his son. 
 The
guns crisscrossed over the wings of his hips hung at the perfect
angle for his hands, the worn sandalwood grips looking dull and
sleepy in this languid indoor light. 
"The head cook," his father said softly. 
 "Imagine it! 
 Thetracks that were blown upland at the railhead. 
 The dead stock in
Hendrickson. 
 And perhaps even . 
. 
. 
 imagine! 
 Imagine! 
"He looked more closely at his son. 
 "It preys on you. 
"
"Like the hawk," Roland said. 
 "It preys on you. 
" Helaughed-at the startling appropriateness of the image rather than
at any lightness in the situation. 
His father smiled. 

"Yes," Roland said. 
 "I guess it . 
. 
. 
 it preys on me. 
"
"Cuthbert was with you," his father said. 
 "He will have toldhis father by now. 
""Yes. 
"
"He fed both of you when Cort-"
"Yes. 
"
"And Cuthbert. 
 Does it prey on him, do you think? 
"
"I don't know. 
" Nor did he care. 
 He was not concerned withhow his feelings compared with those of others. 


"It preys on you because you feel you've caused a man'sdeath? 
"Roland shrugged unwillingly, all at once not content with thisprobing of his motivations. 
"Yet you told. 
 Why? 
"The boy's eyes widened. 
 "How could I not? 
 Treason was-"
His father waved a hand curtly. 
 "If you did it for something ascheap as a schoolbook idea, you did it unworthily. 
 I would rather
see all of Taunton poisoned. 
""I didn't! 
" The words jerked out of him violently. 
 "I wantedto kill him-both of them! 
 Liars! 
 Blackliars! 
 Snakes! 
 They-""Go ahead. 
"
"They hurt me," he finished, defiant. 
 "They changed some-thing and it hurt. 
 I wanted to kill them for it. 
 I wanted to kill them
right there. 
"His father nodded. 
 "That's crude, Roland, but not unworthy. 
Not moral, either, but it is not your place to be moral. 
 In fact . 
. 
. 
"
He peered at his son. 
 "Morals may always be beyond you. 
 You are
not quick, like Cuthbert or Vannay's boy. 
 That's all right, though. 

It will make you formidable. 
"The boy felt both pleased and troubled by this. 
 "He'll-"
"Oh, he'll hang. 
"
The boy nodded. 
 "I want to see it. 
"
The elder Deschain threw his head back and roared laughter. 
"Not as formidable as I thought . 
. 
. 
 or perhaps just stupid. 
" He
closed his mouth abruptly. 
 An arm shot out and grabbed the boy's
upper arm painfully. 
 Roland grimaced but didn't flinch. 
 His fa-
ther peered at him steadily, and the boy looked back, although it
was more difficult than hooding the hawk had been. 
"All right," he said, "thee may. 
" And turned abruptly to go. 

"Father? 
"
"What? 
"

"Do you know who they were talking about? 
 Do you knowwho the good man is? 
"His father turned back and looked at him speculatively. 
 "Yes. 
I think I do. 
""If you caught him," Roland said in his thoughtful, near-plodding way, "no one else like Cook would have to be neck-popped. 
"His father smiled thinly. 
 "Perhaps not for a while. 
 But in theend, someone always has to have his or her neck popped, as you
so quaintly put it. 
 The people demand it. 
 Sooner or later, if there
isn't a turncoat, the people make one. 
""Yes," Roland said, grasping the concept instantly-it wasone he never forgot. 
 "But if you got the good man-""No," his father said flatly. 

"Why not? 
 Why wouldn't that end it? 
"
For a moment his father seemed on the verge of saying why,but then shook his head. 
 "We've talked enough for now, I think. 

Go out from me. 
"He wanted to tell his father not to forget his promise when thetime came for Hax to step through the trap, but he was sensitive
to his father's moods. 
 He put his fist to his forehead, crossed one
foot in front of the other, and bowed. 
 Then he went out, closing
the door quickly. 
 He suspected that what his father wanted now
was to fuck. 
 He was aware that his mother and father did that, and
he was reasonably well informed as to how it was done, but the
mental picture that always condensed with the thought made him
feel both uneasy and oddly guilty. 
 Some years later, Susan would
tell him the story of Oedipus, and he would absorb it in quiet
thoughtfulness, thinking of the odd and bloody triangle formed
by his father, his mother, and by Marten-known in some quar-
ters as Farson, the good man. 
 Or perhaps it was a quadrangle, if
one wished to add himself. 


XIGallows Hill was on the Taunton Road, which was nicely poetic;Cuthbert might have appreciated this, but Roland did not. 
 He did
appreciate the splendidly ominous scaffold which climbed into
the brilliantly blue sky, an angular silhouette which overhung the
coach road. 
The two boys had been let out of Morning Exercises-Corthad read the notes from their fathers laboriously, lips moving,
nodding here and there. 
 When he finished with them, he had care-
fully put the papers away in his pocket. 
 Even here in Gilead, pa-
per was easily as valuable as gold. 
 When these two sheets of it
were safe, he'd looked up at the blue-violet dawn sky and nodded
again. 
"Wait here," he said, and went toward the leaning stone hutthat served him as living quarters. 
 He came back with a slice of
rough, unleavened bread, broke it in two, and gave half to each. 
"When it's over, each of you will put this beneath his shoes. 
Mind you do exactly as I say or I'll clout you into next week. 
"They had not understood until they arrived, riding double onCuthbert's gelding. 
 They were the first, fully two hours ahead of
anyone else and four hours before the hanging, so Gallows Hill
stood deserted-except for the rooks and ravens. 
 The birds were
everywhere. 
 They roosted noisily on the hard, jutting bar that
overhung the trap-the armature of death. 
 They sat in a row along
the edge of the platform, they jostled for position on the stairs. 
"They leave the bodies," Cuthbert muttered. 
 "For the birds. 
"
"Let's go up," Roland said. 

Cuthbert looked at him with something like horror. 
 "Upthere? 
Do you think-"Roland cut him off with a gesture of his hands. 
 "We're yearsearly. 
 No one will come. 
"

"All right. 
"They walked slowly toward the gibbet, and the birds tookwing, cawing and circling like a mob of angry dispossessed peas-
ants. 
 Their bodies were flat black against the pure dawnlight of
the In-World sky. 
For the first time Roland felt the enormity of his responsi-bility in the matter; this wood was not noble, not part of the awe-
some machine of Civilization, but merely warped pine from the
Forest o'Barony, covered with splattered white bird droppings. 
 It
was splashed everywhere-stairs, railing, platform-and it stank. 
The boy turned to Cuthbert with startled, terrified eyes andsaw Cuthbert looking back at him with the same expression. 
"I can't," Cuthbert whispered. 
 "Ro', I can't watch it. 
"
Roland shook his head slowly. 
 There was a lesson here, herealized, not a shining thing but something that was old and rusty
and misshapen. 
 It was why their fathers had let them come. 
 And
with his usual stubborn and inarticulate doggedness, Roland laid
mental hands on whatever it was. 
"You can, Bert. 
"
"I won't sleep tonight if I do. 
"
"Then you won't," Roland said, not seeing what that had to dowith it. 
Cuthbert suddenly seized Roland's hand and looked at himwith such mute agony that Roland's own doubt came back, and he
wished sickly that they had never gone to the west kitchen that
night. 
 His father had been right. 
 Better not to know. 
 Better every
man, woman, and child in Taunton dead and stinking than this. 
But still. 
 Still. 
 Whatever the lesson was, rusty, whatever half-buried thing with sharp edges, he would not let it go or give up
his grip on it. 
"Let's not go up," Cuthbert said. 
 "We've seen everything. 
"
And Roland nodded reluctantly, feeling his grip on that

thing-whatever it was-weaken. 
 Cort, he knew, would haveknocked them both sprawling and then forced them up to the plat-
form step by cursing step . 
. 
. 
 and sniffing fresh blood back up
their noses and down their throats like salty jam as they went. 

Cort would probably have looped new hemp over the yardarm it-
self and put the noose around each of their necks in turn, would
have made them stand on the trap to feel it; and Cort would have
been ready to strike them again if either wept or lost control of his
bladder. 
 And Cort, of course, would have been right. 
 For the first
time in his life, Roland found himself hating his own childhood. 

He wished for the long boots of age. 
He deliberately pried a splinter from the railing and placed itin his breast pocket before turning away. 
"Why did you do that? 
" Cuthbert asked. 

He wished to answer something swaggering: Oh, the luck ofthe gallows . 
. 
. 
,but he only looked at Cuthbert and shook hishead. 
 "Just so I'll have it," he said. 
 "Always have it. 
"They walked away from the gallows, sat down, and waited. 
 Inan hour or so the first of the townfolk began to gather, mostly
families who had come in broken-down wagons and beat-up
buckas, carrying their breakfasts with them-hampers of cold
pancakes folded over fillings of wild pokeberry jam. 
 Roland felt
his stomach growl hungrily and wondered again, with despair,
where the honor and the nobility was. 
 He had been taught of such
things, and was now forced to wonder if they had been lies all
along, or only treasures buried deep by the wise. 
 He wantedtobelieve that, but it seemed to him that Hax in his dirty whites,
walking around and around his steaming, subterranean kitchen
and yelling at the potboys, had more honor than this. 
 He fingered
the splinter from the gallows tree with sick bewilderment. 
 Cuth-
bert lay beside him with his face drawn impassive. 


XIIIn the end it wasn't such of a much, and Roland was glad. 
 Haxwas carried in an open cart, but only his huge girth gave him
away; he had been blindfolded with a wide black cloth that hung
down over his face. 
 A few threw stones, but most merely contin-
ued with their breakfasts as they watched. 
A gunslinger whom the boy did not know well (he was gladhis father had not drawn the black stone) led the fat cook care-
fully up the steps. 
 Two Guards of the Watch had gone ahead and
stood on either side of the trap. 
 When Hax and the gunslinger
reached the top, the gunslinger threw the noosed rope over the
crosstree and then put it over the cook's head, dropping the knot
until it lay just below the left ear. 
 The birds had all flown, but
Roland knew they were waiting. 
"Do you wish to make confession? 
" the gunslinger asked. 

"I have nothing to confess," Hax said. 
 His words carried well,and his voice was oddly dignified in spite of the muffle of cloth
which hung over his lips. 
 The cloth ruffled slightly in the faint,
pleasant breeze that had blown up. 
 "I have not forgotten my fa-
ther's face; it has been with me through all. 
"Roland glanced sharply at the crowd and was disturbed bywhat he saw there-a sense of sympathy? 
 Perhaps admiration? 

He would ask his father. 
 When traitors are called heroes (or he-
roes traitors, he supposed in his frowning way), dark times must
have fallen. 
 Dark times, indeed. 
 He wished he understood better. 

His mind flashed to Cort and the bread Cort had given them. 
 He
felt contempt; the day was coming when Cort would serve him. 

Perhaps not Cuthbert; perhaps Bert would buckle under Cort's
steady fire and remain a page or a horseboy (or infinitely worse, a
perfumed diplomat, dallying in receiving chambers or looking

into bogus crystal balls with doddering kings and princes), but hewould not. 
 He knew it. 
 He was for the open lands and long rides. 

That this seemed a goodfate was something he would marvelover later, in his solitude. 
"Roland? 
"
"I'm here. 
" He took Cuthbert's hand, and their fingers lockedtogether like iron. 
"Charge be capital murder and sedition," the gunslinger said. 
"You have crossed the white, and I, Charles son of Charles, con-
sign you ever to the black. 
"The crowd murmured, some in protest. 

"I never-"
"Tell your tale in the underworld, maggot," said Charles ofCharles, and yanked the lever with both yellow-gauntleted hands. 
The trap dropped. 
 Hax plummeted through, still trying totalk. 
 Roland never forgot that. 
 The cook went still trying to talk. 
And where did he finish the last sentence he would ever begin on
earth? 
 His words were ended by the sound an exploding pineknot
makes on the hearth in the cold heart of a winter night. 
But on the whole he thought it not so much. 
 The cook's legskicked out once in a wide Y; the crowd made a satisfied whistling
noise; the Guards of the Watch dropped their military pose and
began to gather things up negligently. 
 Charles son of Charles
walked back down the steps slowly, mounted his horse, and rode
off, cutting roughly through one gaggle of picnickers, quirting a
few of the slowcoaches, making them scurry. 
The crowd dispersed rapidly after that, and in forty minutesthe two boys were left alone on the small hill they had chosen. 

The birds were returning to examine their new prize. 
 One lit on
Hax's shoulder and sat there chummily, darting its beak at the
bright and shiny hoop Hax had always worn in his right ear. 


"It doesn't look like him at all," Cuthbert said. 
"Oh yes, it does," Roland said confidently as they walkedtoward the gallows, the bread in their hands. 
 Bert looked abashed. 
They paused beneath the crosstree, looking up at the dan-gling, twisting body. 
 Cuthbert reached up and touched one hairy
ankle, defiantly. 
 The body started on a new, twisting arc. 
Then, rapidly, they broke the bread and spread the roughchunks beneath the dangling feet. 
 Roland looked back just once
as they rode away. 
 Now there were thousands of birds. 
 The
bread-he grasped this only dimly-was symbolic, then. 
"It was good," Cuthbert said suddenly. 
 "It . 
. 
. 
 I . 
. 
. 
 I liked it. 
 I did. 
"Roland was not shocked by this, although he had not particu-larly cared for the scene. 
 But he thought he could perhaps under-
stand what Bert was saying. 
 Perhaps he'd not finish as a diplomat
after all, jokes and easy line of talk or not. 
"I don't know about that," he said, "but it was something. 
 Itsurely was. 
"The land did not fall to the good man for another five years,and by that time Roland was a gunslinger, his father was dead, he
himself had become a matricide-and the world had moved on. 
The long years and long rides had begun. 
XIII"Look," Jake said, pointing upward. 
The gunslinger looked up and felt a twinge in his right hip. 
He winced. 
 They had been in the foothills two days now, and al-
though the waterskins were almost empty again, it didn't matter
now. 
 There would soon be all the water they could drink. 


He followed the vector of Jake's finger upward, past the riseof the green plain to the naked and flashing cliffs and gorgesabove it . 
. 
. 
 on up toward the snowcap itself. 
Faint and far, nothing but a tiny dot (it might have been one ofthose motes that dance perpetually in front of the eyes, except for
its constancy), the gunslinger beheld the man in black, moving up
the slopes with deadly progress, a miniscule fly on a huge granite
wall. 
"Is that him? 
" Jake asked. 

The gunslinger looked at the depersonalized mote doing itsfaraway acrobatics, feeling nothing but a premonition of sorrow. 
"That's him, Jake. 
"
"Do you think we'll catch him? 
"
"Not on this side. 
 On the other. 
 And not if we stand here talk-ing about it. 
""They're so high," Jake said. 
 "What's on the other side? 
"
"I don't know," the gunslinger said. 
 "I don't think anybodydoes. 
 Maybe they did once. 
 Come on, boy. 
"They began to move upward again, sending small runnels ofpebbles and sand down toward the desert that washed away be-
hind them in a flat bake-sheet that seemed to never end. 
 Above
them, far above, the man in black moved up and up and up. 
 It was
impossible to see if he looked back. 
 He seemed to leap across im-
possible gulfs, to scale sheer faces. 
 Once or twice he disappeared,
but always they saw him again, until the violet curtain of dusk
shut him from their view. 
 When they made their camp for the eve-
ning, the boy spoke little, and the gunslinger wondered if the boy
knew what he himself had already intuited. 
 He thought of Cuth-
bert's face, hot, dismayed, excited. 
 He thought of the bread. 
 He
thought of the birds. 
 It ends this way, he thought. 
 Again and again
it ends this way. 
 There are quests and roads that lead ever onward,

and all of them end in the same place-upon the killing ground. 
Except, perhaps, the road to the Tower. 
 There ka might showits true face. 
The boy, the sacrifice, his face innocent and very young in thelight of their tiny fire, had fallen asleep over his beans. 
 The gun-slinger covered him with the horse blanket and then curled up to
sleep himself. 


The ORACLE AND THE MOUNTAINS

CHAPTER THREE
The Oracle and the Mountains The boy found the oracle and it almost destroyed him. 
Some thin instinct brought the gunslinger up from sleep tothe velvet darkness which had fallen on them at dusk. 
 That hadbeen when he and Jake reached the grassy, nearly level oasis
above the first rise of tumbled foothills. 
 Even on the hardscrabble
below, where they had toiled and fought for every foot in the
killer sun, they had been able to hear the sound of crickets rub-
bing their legs seductively together in the perpetual green of wil-
low groves above them. 
 The gunslinger remained calm in his
mind, and the boy had kept up at least the pretense of a faade,
and that had made the gunslinger proud. 
 But Jake hadn't been
able to hide the wildness in his eyes, which were white and starey,
the eyes of a horse scenting water and held back from bolting
only by the tenuous chain of its master's mind; like a horse at 
the point where only understanding, not the spur, could hold it
steady. 
 The gunslinger could gauge the need in Jake by the mad-
ness the sounds of the crickets bred in his own body. 
 His arms
seemed to seek out shale to scrape on, and his knees seemed to
beg to be ripped in tiny, maddening, salty gashes. 
The sun trampled them all the way; even when it turned 
swollen, feverish red with sunset, it shone perversely through theknife-cut in the hills off to their left, blinding them and making
every teardrop of sweat into a prism of pain. 
Then there was sawgrass: at first only yellow scrub, clingingwith gruesome vitality to the bleak soil where the last of the
runoff reached. 
 Further up there was witchgrass, first sparse, then
green and rank . 
. 
. 
 then the sweet smell of real grass, mixed with
timothy and shaded by the first of the dwarfed firs. 
 There the gun-
slinger saw an arc of brown moving in the shadows. 
 He drew,
fired, and felled the rabbit all before Jake could begin to cry out
his surprise. 
 A moment later he had reholstered the gun. 
"Here," the gunslinger said. 
 Up ahead the grass deepened intoa jungle of green willows that was shocking after the parched
sterility of the endless hardpan. 
 There would be a spring, per-
haps several of them, and it would be even cooler, but it was
better out here in the open. 
 The boy had pushed every step he
could push, and there might be suckerbats in the deeper shadows
of the grove. 
 The bats might break the boy's sleep, no matter how
deep it was, and if they were vampires, neither of them might
awaken . 
. 
. 
 at least, not in this world. 
The boy said, "I'll get some wood. 
"
The gunslinger smiled. 
 "No, you won't. 
 Sit yourself, Jake. 
"Whose phrase had that been? 
 Some woman. 
 Susan? 
 He couldn't
remember. 
 Time's the thief of memory:that one he knew. 
 That onehad been Vannay's. 
The boy sat. 
 When the gunslinger got back, Jake was asleepin the grass. 
 A large praying mantis was performing ablutions on
the springy stem of the kid's cowlick. 
 The gunslinger snorted
laughter-the first in gods knew how long-and set the fire and
went after water. 
The willow jungle was deeper than he had suspected, and

confusing in the failing light. 
 But he found a spring, richly guardedby frogs and peepers. 
 He filled one of their waterskins . 
. 
. 
 and
paused. 
 The sounds that filled the night awoke an uneasy sensual-
ity in him, a feeling that not even Allie, the woman he had bedded
with in Tull, had been able to bring out-too much of his time
with Allie had been business. 
 He chalked it up to the sudden
blinding change from the desert. 
 After all those miles of bleak
hardpan, the softness of the dark seemed nearly decadent. 
He returned to the camp and skinned the rabbit while waterboiled over the fire. 
 Mixed with the last of their canned veg, the
rabbit made an excellent stew. 
 He woke Jake and watched him as
he ate, bleary but ravenous. 
"We stay here tomorrow," the gunslinger said. 

"But that man you're after . 
. 
. 
 that priest . 
. 
. 
"
"He's no priest. 
 And don't worry. 
 He'll keep. 
"
"How do you know that? 
"
The gunslinger could only shake his head. 
 The intuition wasstrong in him . 
. 
. 
 but it was not a good intuition. 
After the meal, he rinsed the cans from which they had eaten(marveling again at his own water extravagance), and when he
turned around, Jake was asleep again. 
 The gunslinger felt the
now-familiar rising and falling in his chest that he could only
identify with Cuthbert. 
 Cuthbert had been Roland's own age, but
he had seemed so much younger. 
His cigarette drooped toward the grass, and he tossed it intothe fire. 
 He looked at it, the clear yellow burn so different, so much
cleaner, from the way the devil-grass burned. 
 The air was won-
derfully cool, and he lay down with his back to the fire. 
Far away, through the gash that led the way into the moun-tains, he heard the thick mouth of the perpetual thunder. 
 He slept. 

And dreamed. 


IISusan Delgado, his beloved, was dying before his eyes. 
He watched, his arms held by two villagers on each side, hisneck dog-caught in a huge, rusty iron collar. 
 This wasn't the wayit had happened-he hadn't even been there-but dreams had
their own logic, didn't they? 
She was dying. 
 He could smell her burning hair, could heartheir cries of Charyou tree. 
And he could see the color of his ownmadness. 
 Susan, lovely girl at the window, horseman's daughter. 

How she had flown across the Drop, her shadow that of horse and
girl merged, a fabulous creature out of an old story, something
wild and free! 
 How they had flown together in the corn! 
 Now they
were flinging cornhusks at her and the husks caught fire even be-
fore they caught in her hair. 
Charyou tree, charyou tree, theycried, these enemies of light and love, and somewhere the witch
was cackling. 
 Rhea, the witch's name had been, and Susan was
turning black in the flames, her skin cracking open, and-And what was she calling? 

"The boy! 
" she was screaming. 
 "Roland, the boy! 
"
He whirled, pulling his captors with him. 
 The collar ripped athis neck and he heard the hitching, strangled sounds that were
coming from his own throat. 
 There was a sickish-sweet smell of
barbecuing meat on the air. 
The boy was looking down at him from a window high abovethe funeral pyre, the same window where Susan, who had taught
him to be a man, had once sat and sung the old songs: "Hey
Jude" and "Ease on Down the Road" and "Careless Love. 
" He
looked out from the window like the statue of an alabaster saint
in a cathedral. 
 His eyes were marble. 
 A spike had been driven
through Jake's forehead. 


The gunslinger felt the strangling, ripping scream that sig-naled the beginning of his lunacy pull up from the bottom of hisbelly. 
"Nnnnnnnnnn-"IIIRoland grunted a cry as he felt the fire singe him. 
 He sat bolt up-
right in the dark, still feeling the dream of Mejis around him,
strangling him like the collar he'd worn. 
 In his twistings and turn-
ings he had thrown one hand against the dying coals of the fire. 

He put the hand to his face, feeling the dream flee, leaving only
the stark picture of Jake, plaster-white, a saint for demons. 
"Nnnnnnnnnn-"
He glared around at the mystic darkness of the willow grove,both guns out and ready. 
 His eyes were red loopholes in the last
glow from the fire. 
"Nnnnnnnnnn-"
Jake. 

The gunslinger was up and on the run. 
 A bitter circle of moon had risen and he could follow the boy's track in the dew. 
 
He ducked under the first of the willows, splashed through the
spring, and legged up the far bank, skidding in the dampness
(even now his body could relish it). 
 Willow withes slapped at his
face. 
 The trees were thicker here, and the moon was blotted out. 

Tree-trunks rose in lurching shadows. 
 The grass, now knee-high,
caressed him, as if pleading with him to slow down, to enjoy the
cool. 
 To enjoy the life. 
 Half-rotted dead branches reached for his
shins, his cojones. 
 He paused for a moment, lifting his head andscenting at the air. 
 A ghost of a breeze helped him. 
 The boy did

not smell good, of course; neither of them did. 
 The gunslinger'snostrils flared like those of an ape. 
 The younger, lighter odor of
the boy's sweat was faint, oily, unmistakable. 
 He crashed over a
deadfall of grass and bramble and downed branches, sprinted
through a tunnel of overhanging willow and sumac. 
 Moss struck
his shoulders like flabby corpse-hands. 
 Some clung in sighing
gray tendrils. 
He clawed through a last barricade of willows and came to aclearing that looked up at the stars and the highest peak of the
range, gleaming skull-white at an impossible altitude. 
There was a ring of black standing stones which looked likesome sort of surreal animal-trap in the moonlight. 
 In the center
was a table of stone . 
. 
. 
 an altar. 
 Very old, rising out of the ground
on a thick arm of basalt. 
The boy stood before it, trembling back and forth. 
 His handsshook at his sides as if infused with static electricity. 
 The gun-
slinger called his name sharply, and Jake responded with that
inarticulate sound of negation. 
 The faint smear of face, almost
hidden by the boy's left shoulder, looked both terrified and ex-
alted. 
 And there was something else. 
The gunslinger stepped inside the ring and Jake screamed, re-coiling and throwing up his arms. 
 Now his face could be seen
clearly. 
 The gunslinger read fear and terror at war with some ex-
cruciating pleasure. 
The gunslinger felt it touch him-the spirit of the oracle, thesuccubus. 
 His loins were suddenly filled with light, a light that
was soft yet hard. 
 He felt his head twisting, his tongue thickening
and becoming sensitive to even the spittle that coated it. 
He didn't think about what he was doing when he pulled thehalf-rotted jawbone from the pocket where he had carried it since
he found it in the lair of the speaking-demon at the way station. 


He didn't think, but it had never frightened him to operate onpure instinct. 
 That had ever been the best and truest place for him. 

He held the jawbone's frozen, prehistoric grin up before his eyes,
holding his other arm out stiffly, first and last fingers poked out in
the ancient forked sign, the ward against the evil eye. 
The current of sensuality was whipped away from him like adrape. 
Jake screamed again. 

The gunslinger walked to him and held the jawbone in frontof Jake's warring eyes. 
"See this, Jake-see it very well. 
"
What came in response was a wet sound of agony. 
 The boytried to pull his gaze away, could not. 
 For a moment it seemed
that he might be pulled apart-mentally if not physically. 
 Then,
suddenly, both eyes rolled up to the whites. 
 Jake collapsed. 
 His
body struck the earth limply, one hand almost touching the squat
basalt arm that supported the altar. 
 The gunslinger dropped to one
knee and picked him up. 
 He was amazingly light, as dehydrated
as a November leaf from their long walk through the desert. 
Around him Roland could feel the presence that dwelt in thecircle of stones whirring with a jealous anger-its prize was be-
ing taken from it. 
 Once the gunslinger passed out of the circle,
the sense of frustrated jealousy faded quickly. 
 He carried Jake
back to their camp. 
 By the time they got there, the boy's twitching
unconsciousness had become deep sleep. 
The gunslinger paused for a moment above the gray ruin ofthe fire. 
 The moonlight on Jake's face reminded him again of a
church saint, alabaster purity all unknown. 
 He hugged the kid and
put a dry kiss on his cheek, knowing that he loved him. 
 Well,
maybe that wasn't quite right. 
 Maybe the truth was that he'd loved
the kid from the first moment he'd seen him (as he had Susan

Delgado), and was only now allowing himself to recognize thefact. 
 For it wasa fact. 
And it seemed that he could almost feel the laughter from theman in black, someplace far above them. 
IVJake, calling him: that was how the gunslinger awoke. 
 He'd tied
Jake firmly to one of the tough bushes that grew nearby, and the
boy was hungry and upset. 
 By the sun, it was almost nine-thirty. 
"Why'd you tie me up? 
" Jake asked indignantly as the gun-slinger loosened the thick knots in the blanket. 
 "I wasn't going to
run away! 
""You didrun away," the gunslinger said, and the expressionon Jake's face made him smile. 
 "I had to go out and get you. 
 You
were sleepwalking. 
""I was? 
" Jake looked at him suspiciously. 
 "I never did any-thing like that be-"The gunslinger suddenly produced the jawbone and held it infront of Jake's face. 
 Jake flinched away from it, grimacing and
raising his arm. 
"See? 
"
Jake nodded, bewildered. 
 "What happened? 
"
"We don't have time to palaver now. 
 I have to go off for awhile. 
 I may be gone the whole day. 
 So listen to me, boy. 
 It's im-
portant. 
 If sunset comes and I'm not back-"Fear flashed on Jake's face. 
 "You're leaving me! 
"
The gunslinger only looked at him. 

"No," Jake said after a moment. 
 "I guess if you were going toleave me, you already would have. 
"

"That's using your head. 
 Now listen, and hear me very well. 
 Iwant you to stay here while I'm gone. 
 Right here in camp. 
 Don'tstray, even if it seems like the best idea in the world. 
 And if you
feel strange-funny in any way-you pick up this bone and hold
it in your hands. 
"Hate and disgust crossed Jake's face, mixed with bewilder-ment. 
 "I couldn't. 
 I . 
. 
. 
 I just couldn't. 
""You can. 
 You may have to. 
 Especially after midday. 
 It's im-portant. 
 You may feel pukey or headachey when you first lay hold
of it, but that'll pass. 
 Do you understand? 
""Yes. 
"
"And will you do what I say? 
"
"Yes, but why do you have to go away? 
" Jake burst out. 

"I just do. 
"
The gunslinger caught another fascinating glimpse of thesteel that lay under the boy's surface, as enigmatic as the story he
had told about coming from a city where the buildings were so
tall they actually scraped the sky. 
 It wasn't Cuthbert the boy re-
minded him of so much as his other close friend, Alain. 
 Alain had
been quiet, in no way prone to Bert's grandstanding quackery,
and he'd been dependable and afraid of nothing. 
"All right," Jake said. 

The gunslinger laid the jawbone carefully on the ground nextto the ruins of the fire, where it grinned up through the grass like
some eroded fossil that has seen the light of day after a night of
five thousand years. 
 Jake wouldn't look at it. 
 His face was pale
and miserable. 
 The gunslinger wondered if it would profit them
for him to put the boy to sleep and question him, then decided
there would be little gain. 
 He knew well enough that the spirit of
the stone circle was surely a demon, and very likely an oracle as
well. 
 A demon with no shape, only a kind of unformed sexual

glare with the eye of prophecy. 
 He wondered briefly if it mightnot be the soul of Sylvia Pittston, the giant woman whose reli-
gious huckstering had led to the final showdown in Tull . 
. 
. 
 but
no. 
 Not her. 
 The stones in the circle were ancient. 
 Sylvia Pittston
was a jilly-come-lately compared to the thing that made its den
here. 
 It was old . 
. 
. 
 and sly. 
 But the gunslinger knew the forms of
speaking quite well and did not think the boy would have to use
the jawbone mojo. 
 The voice and mind of the oracle would be
more than occupied with him. 
 The gunslinger needed to know
things, in spite of the risk . 
. 
. 
 and the risk was high. 
 Yet for both
Jake and himself, he needed desperately to know. 
The gunslinger opened his tobacco poke and pawed throughit, pushing the dry strands of leaf aside until he came to a minis-
cule object wrapped in a fragment of white paper. 
 He rolled it be-
tween fingers that would all too soon be gone and looked absently
up at the sky. 
 Then he unwrapped it and held the contents-a tiny
white pill with edges that had been much worn with traveling-in
his hand. 
Jake looked at it curiously. 
 "What's that? 
"
The gunslinger uttered a short laugh. 
 "The story Cort used totell us was that the Old Gods pissed over the desert and made
mescaline. 
"Jake only looked puzzled. 

"This is a drug," the gunslinger said. 
 "But not one that putsyou to sleep. 
 One that wakes you up all the way for a little while. 
""Like LSD," the boy agreed instantly and then looked puzzled. 

"What's that? 
"
"I don't know," Jake said. 
 "It just popped out. 
 I think it camefrom . 
. 
. 
 you know, before. 
"The gunslinger nodded, but he was doubtful. 
 He had neverheard of mescaline referred to as LSD, not even in Marten's old
books. 


"Will it hurt you? 
" Jake asked. 
"It never has," the gunslinger said, conscious of the evasion. 

"I don't like it. 
"
"Never mind. 
"
The gunslinger squatted in front of the waterskin, took amouthful, and swallowed the pill. 
 As always, he felt an immediate
reaction in his mouth: it seemed overloaded with saliva. 
 He sat
down before the dead fire. 
"When does something happen to you? 
" Jake asked. 

"Not for a little while. 
 Be quiet. 
"
So Jake was quiet, watching with open suspicion as the gun-slinger went calmly about the ritual of cleaning his guns. 
He reholstered them and said, "Your shirt, Jake. 
 Take it offand give it to me. 
"Jake pulled his faded shirt reluctantly over his head, revealingthe skinny stack of his ribs, and gave it to Roland. 
The gunslinger produced a needle that had been threaded intothe side-seam of his jeans, and thread from an empty cartridge-
loop in his gunbelt. 
 He began to sew up a long rip in one of the
sleeves of the boy's shirt. 
 As he finished and handed the shirt
back, he felt the mesc beginning to take hold-there was a tight-
ening in his stomach and a feeling that all the muscles in his body
were being cranked up a notch. 
"I have to go," he said, getting up. 
 "It's time. 
"
The boy half rose, his face a shadow of concern, and then hesettled back. 
 "Be careful," he said. 
 "Please. 
""Remember the jawbone," the gunslinger said. 
 He put hishand on Jake's head as he went by and tousled the corn-colored
hair. 
 The gesture startled him into a short laugh. 
 Jake watched af-
ter him with a troubled smile until he was gone into the willow
jungle. 


VThe gunslinger walked deliberately toward the circle of stones,pausing long enough to get a cool drink from the spring. 
 He
could see his own reflection in a tiny pool edged with moss and
lilypads, and he looked at himself for a moment, as fascinated as
Narcissus. 
 The mind-reaction was beginning to settle in, slowing
down his chain of thought by seeming to increase the connota-
tions of every idea and every bit of sensory input. 
 Things began
to take on weight and thickness that had been heretofore invisi-
ble. 
 He paused, getting to his feet again, and looked through the
tangled snarl of willows. 
 Sunlight slanted through in a golden,
dusty bar, and he watched the interplay of motes and tiny flying
things for a bit before going on. 
The drug had often disturbed him: his ego was too strong (orperhaps just too simple) to enjoy being eclipsed and peeled back,
made a target for more sensitive emotions-they tickled at him
(and sometimes maddened him) like the touch of a cat's whiskers. 

But this time he felt fairly calm. 
 That was good. 
He stepped into the clearing and walked straight into the cir-cle. 
 He stood, letting his mind run free. 
 Yes, it was coming harder
now, faster. 
 The grass screamed green at him; it seemed that if he
bent over and rubbed his hands in it he would stand up with green
paint all over his fingers and palms. 
 He resisted a puckish urge to
try the experiment. 
But there was no voice from the oracle. 
 No stirring, sexual orotherwise. 
He went to the altar, stood beside it for a moment. 
 Coherentthought was now almost impossible. 
 His teeth felt strange in his
head, tiny tombstones set in pink moist earth. 
 The world held too
much light. 
 He climbed up on the altar and lay back. 
 His mind

was becoming a jungle full of strange thought-plants that he hadnever seen or suspected before, a willow-jungle that had grown
up around a mescaline spring. 
 The sky was water and he hung
suspended over it. 
 The thought gave him a vertigo that seemed
faraway and unimportant. 
A line of old poetry occurred to him, not a nursery voice now,no; his mother had feared the drugs and the necessity of them (as
she had feared Cort and the need for this beater of boys); this
verse came from the Manni-folk to the north of the desert, a clan
of them still living among machines that usually didn't work . 
. 
. 

and which sometimes ate the men when they did. 
 The lines
played again and again, reminding him (in an unconnected way
that was typical of the mescaline rush) of snow falling in a globe
he had owned as a child, mystic and half fantastical:Beyond the reach of human range
A drop of hell, a touch of strange . 
. 
. 
The trees which overhung the altar contained faces. 
 He watchedthem with abstracted fascination: Here was a dragon, green and
twitching, here a wood-nymph with beckoning branch arms, here
a living skull overgrown with slime. 
 Faces. 
 Faces. 
The grasses of the clearing suddenly whipped and bent. 

I come. 

I come. 

Vague stirrings in his flesh. 
 How far I have come, he thought. 
From lying with Susan in sweet grass on the Drop to this. 
She pressed over him, a body made of the wind, a breast offragrant jasmine, rose, and honeysuckle. 
"Make your prophecy," he said. 
 "Tell me what I need toknow. 
" His mouth felt full of metal. 


A sigh. 
 A faint sound of weeping. 
 The gunslinger's genitalsfelt drawn and hard. 
 Over him and beyond the faces in the leaves,he could see the mountains-hard and brutal and full of teeth. 
The body moved against him, struggled with him. 
 He felt hishands curl into fists. 
 She had sent him a vision of Susan. 
 It was
Susan above him, lovely Susan Delgado, waiting for him in an
abandoned drover's hut on the Drop with her hair spilled down
her back and over her shoulders. 
 He tossed his head, but her face
followed. 
Jasmine, rose, honeysuckle, old hay . 
. 
. 
 the smell of love. 
Love me. 
"Speak prophecy," he said. 
 "Speak truth. 
"
Please,the oracle wept. 
 Don't be cold. 
 It's always so coldhere-Hands slipping over his flesh, manipulating, lighting him onfire. 
 Pulling him. 
 Drawing. 
 A perfumed black crevice. 
 Wet and
warm-No. 
 Dry. 
 Cold. 
 Sterile. 

Have a touch of mercy, gunslinger. 
 Ah, please, I cry your fa-vor! 
 Mercy! 
Would you have mercy on the boy? 

What boy? 
 I know no boy. 
 It's not boys I need. 
 O please. 

Jasmine, rose, honeysuckle. 
 Dry hay with its ghost of summerclover. 
 Oil decanted from ancient urns. 
 A riot for flesh. 
"After," he said. 
 "If what you tell me is useful. 
"
Now. 
 Please. 
 Now. 

He let his mind coil out at her, the antithesis of emotion. 
 Thebody that hung over him froze and seemed to scream. 
 There was a
brief, vicious tug-of-war between his temples-his mind was the
rope, gray and fibrous. 
 For long moments there was no sound but
the quiet hush of his breathing and the faint breeze which made

the green faces in the trees shift, wink, and grimace. 
 No birdsang. 
Her hold loosened. 
 Again there was the sound of sobbing. 
 Itwould have to be quick, or she would leave him. 
 To stay now
meant attenuation; perhaps her own kind of death. 
 Already he felt
her chilling, drawing away to leave the circle of stones. 
 Wind rip-
pled the grass in tortured patterns. 
"Prophecy," he said, and then an even bleaker noun. 
 "Truth. 
"
A weeping, tired sigh. 
 He could almost have granted themercy she begged, but-there was Jake. 
 He would have found
Jake dead or insane if he had been any later last night. 
Sleep then. 

"No. 
"
Then half-sleep. 

What she asked was dangerous, but also probably necessary. 
The gunslinger turned his eyes up to the faces in the leaves. 
 A
play was being enacted there for his amusement. 
 Worlds rose and
fell before him. 
 Empires were built across shining sands where
forever machines toiled in abstract electronic frenzies. 
 Empires
declined, fell, rose again. 
 Wheels that had spun like silent liquid
moved more slowly, began to squeak, began to scream, stopped. 

Sand choked the stainless steel gutters of concentric streets below
dark skies full of stars like beds of cold jewels. 
 And through it all,
a dying wind of change blew, bringing with it the cinnamon smell
of late October. 
 The gunslinger watched as the world moved on. 
And half-slept. 

Three. 
 This is the number of your fate. 

Three? 

Yes, three is mystic. 
 Three stands at the heart of your quest. 
Another number comes later. 
 Now the number is three. 
Which three? 


"We see in part, and thus is the mirror of prophecydarkened. 
"Tell me what you can. 
The first is young, dark-haired. 
 He stands on the brink of rob-bery and murder. 
 A demon has infested him. 
 The name of the de-
mon is HEROIN. 
Which demon is that? 
 I know it not, even from my tutor'slessons. 
"We see in part, and thus is the mirror of prophecy dark-ened. 
" There are other worlds, gunslinger, and other demons. 

These waters are deep. 
 Watch for the doorways. 
 Watch for the
roses and the unfound doorways. 
The second? 

She comes on wheels. 
 I see no more. 

The third? 

Death . 
. 
. 
 but not for you. 

The man in black? 
 Where is he? 

Near. 
 You will speak with him soon. 

Of what will we speak? 

The Tower. 

The boy? 
 Jake? 

. 
. 
. 

Tell me of the boy! 

The boy is your gate to the man in black. 
 The man in black isyour gate to the three. 
 The three are your way to the Dark Tower. 
How? 
 How can that be? 
 Why must it be? 

"We see in part, and thus is the mirror-"
God damn you. 

No God damned me. 

Don't patronize me, Thing. 

. 
. 
. 

What shall I call you, then? 
 Star-slut? 
 Whore of the Winds? 



Some live on love that comes to the ancient places . 
. 
. 
 even inthese sad and evil times. 
 Some, gunslinger, live on blood. 
 Even, I understand, on the blood of young boys. 
May he not be spared? 

Yes. 

How? 

Cease, gunslinger. 
 Strike your camp and turn back north-west. 
 In the northwest there is still a need for men who live by the
bullet. 
I am sworn by my father's guns and by the treachery ofMarten. 
Marten is no more. 
 The man in black has eaten his soul. 
 Thisyou know. 
I am sworn. 

Then you are damned. 

Have your way with me, bitch. 

Eagerness. 
The shadow swung over him, enfolded him. 
 There was sudden ecstasy broken only by a galaxy of pain, as faint and bright as
ancient stars gone red with collapse. 
 Faces came to him unbidden
at the climax of their coupling: Sylvia Pittston; Alice, the woman
from Tull; Susan; a dozen others. 
And finally, after an eternity, he pushed her away from him,once again in his right mind, bone-weary and disgusted. 
No! 
 It isn't enough! 
 It-
"Let me be," the gunslinger said. 
 He sat up and almost fell offthe altar before regaining his feet. 
 She touched him tentatively(honeysuckle, jasmine, sweet attar)

and he pushed her violently, falling to his knees. 
He made his drunken way to the perimeter of the circle. 
 Hestaggered through, feeling a huge weight fall from his shoulders. 

He drew a shuddering, weeping breath. 
 Had he learned enough to
justify this feeling of defilement? 
 He didn't know. 
 In time he sup-
posed he would. 
 As he started away, he could feel her standing at
the bars of her prison, watching him go from her. 
 He wondered
how long it might be before someone else crossed the desert and
found her, hungry and alone. 
 For a moment he felt dwarfed by the
possibilities of time. 


"You're sick! 
"Jake stood up fast when the gunslinger shambled back throughthe last trees and came into camp. 
 He'd been huddled by the ruins
of the tiny fire, the jawbone across his knees, gnawing disconso-
lately on the bones of the rabbit. 
 Now he ran toward the gun-
slinger with a look of distress that made Roland feel the full, ugly
weight of a coming betrayal. 
"No," he said. 
 "Not sick. 
 Just tired. 
 Whipped. 
" He gesturedabsently at the jawbone. 
 "You can let go of that, Jake. 
"The boy threw it down quickly and violently, rubbing hishands across his shirt after doing it. 
 His upper lip rose and fell in
a snarl that was, the gunslinger believed, perfectly unconscious. 
The gunslinger sat down-almost fell down-feeling theaching joints and the pummeled, thick mind that was the unlovely
afterglow of mescaline. 
 His crotch also pulsed with a dull ache. 

He rolled a cigarette with careful, unthinking slowness. 
 Jake
watched. 
 The gunslinger had a sudden impulse to speak to the

boy dan-dinh after telling him all he had learned, then thrust theidea away with horror. 
 He wondered if a part of him-mind or
soul-might not be disintegrating. 
 To open one's mind and heart
to the command of a child? 
 The idea was insane. 
"We sleep here tonight. 
 Tomorrow we start climbing. 
 I'll goout a little later and see if I can't shoot something for supper. 
 We
need to make strength. 
 I've got to sleep now. 
 Okay? 
""Sure. 
 Knock yourself out. 
"
"I don't understand you. 
"
"Do what you want. 
"
"Ah. 
" The gunslinger nodded and lay back. 
 Knock myself out,he thought. 
 Knock. 
 Myself out. 
When he woke up the shadows were long across the smallgrass clearing. 
 "Build up the fire," he told Jake and tossed him his
flint and steel. 
 "Can you use that? 
""Yes, I think so. 
"
The gunslinger walked toward the willow grove and thenstopped at the sound of the boy's voice. 
 Stopped dead. 
"Spark-a-dark, where's my sire? 
" the boy murmured, andRoland heard the sharp chik! 
chik! 
chik! 
of the flint. 
 It sounded likethe cry of a small mechanical bird. 
 "Will I lay me? 
 Will I stay
me? 
 Bless this camp with fire. 
"Picked it up from me,the gunslinger thought, not in the leastsurprised to discover he was all over goosebumps and on the
verge of shivering like a wet dog. 
 Picked it up from me, words Idon't even remember saying, and will I betray such? 
 Ah, Roland,
will thee betray such true thread as this in a sad unthreaded
world? 
 Could anything justify it? 
'Tis just words. 

Aye, but old ones. 
 Good ones. 

"Roland? 
" the boy called. 
 "Are you all right? 
"

"Yar," he said gruffly, and the tang of smoke stung faintly inhis nose. 
 "Thee's made fire. 
""Yes," the boy said simply, and Roland did not need to turn toknow the boy was smiling. 
The gunslinger got moving and bore left, this time skirtingthe willow grove. 
 At a place where the ground opened out and up-ward in heavy open grass, he stepped back into the shadows and
stood silently. 
 Faintly, clearly, he could hear the crackle of the
campfire Jake had rekindled. 
 The sound made him smile. 
He stood without moving for ten minutes, fifteen, twenty. 
Three rabbits came, and once they were at silflay the gunslinger
pulled leather. 
 He took them down, skinned them, gutted them,
and brought them back to the camp. 
 Jake had water already steam-
ing over the low flames. 
The gunslinger nodded to him. 
 "That's a good piece of work. 
"
Jake flushed with pleasure and silently handed back the flintand steel. 
While the stew cooked, the gunslinger used the last of thelight to go back into the willow grove. 
 Near the first pool he be-
gan to hack at the tough vines that grew near the water's marshy
verge. 
 Later, as the fire burned down to coals and Jake slept, he
would plait them into ropes that might be of some limited use
later. 
 But his intuition was that the climb would not be a particu-
larly difficult one. 
 He felt ka at work on the surface of things and
no longer even considered it odd. 
The vines bled green sap over his hands as he carried themback to where Jake waited. 
They were up with the sun and packed in half an hour. 
 Thegunslinger hoped to shoot another rabbit in the meadow as they
fed, but time was short and no rabbit showed itself. 
 The bundle of
their remaining food was now so small and light that Jake carried
it easily. 
 He had toughened up, this boy; you could see it. 


The gunslinger carried their water, freshly drawn from one ofthe springs. 
 He looped his three vine ropes around his belly. 
 Theygave the circle of stones a wide berth (the gunslinger was afraid
the boy might feel a recurrence of fear, but when they passed
above it on a stony rise, Jake only offered it a passing glance and
then looked at a bird that hovered upwind). 
 Soon enough, the
trees began to lose their height and lushness. 
 Trunks were twisted
and roots seemed to struggle with the earth in a tortured hunt for
moisture. 
"It's all so old," Jake said glumly when they paused for a rest. 
"Isn't there anything young in this world? 
"The gunslinger smiled and gave Jake an elbow. 
 "You are," hesaid. 
Jake responded with a wan smile. 
 "Will it be hard to climb? 
"
The gunslinger looked at him, curious. 
 "The mountains arehigh. 
 Don't you think it will be a hard climb? 
"Jake looked back at him, his eyes clouded, puzzled. 

"No. 
"
They went on. 
VIIIThe sun climbed to its zenith, seemed to hang there more briefly
than it ever had during the desert crossing, and then passed on,
returning them their shadows. 
 Shelves of rock protruded from the
rising land like the arms of giant easychairs buried in the earth. 

The scrub grass turned yellow and sere. 
 Finally they were faced
with a deep, chimney-like crevasse in their path and they scaled a
short, peeling rise of rock to get around and above it. 
 The an-
cient granite had faulted on lines that were step-like, and as they
had both intuited, the beginning of their climb, at least, was easy. 


They paused on the four-foot-wide scarp at the top and lookedback over the land to the desert, which curled around the upland
like a huge yellow paw. 
 Further off it gleamed at them in a white
shield that dazzled the eye, receding into dim waves of rising
heat. 
 The gunslinger felt faintly amazed at the realization that 
this desert had nearly murdered him. 
 From where they stood, in a 
new coolness, the desert certainly appeared momentous, but not
deadly. 
They turned back to the business of the climb, scramblingover jackstraw falls of rock and crouch-walking up inclined planes
of stone shot with glitters of quartz and mica. 
 The rock was pleas-
antly warm to the touch, but the air was definitely cooler. 
 In the
late afternoon the gunslinger heard the faint sound of thunder. 

The rising line of the mountains obscured the sight of the rain on
the other side, however. 
When the shadows began to turn purple, they camped in theoverhang of a jutting brow of rock. 
 The gunslinger anchored their
blanket above and below, fashioning a kind of shanty lean-to. 

They sat at the mouth of it, watching the sky spread a cloak over
the world. 
 Jake dangled his feet over the drop. 
 The gunslinger
rolled his evening smoke and eyed Jake half humorously. 
 "Don't
roll over in your sleep," he said, "or you may wake up in hell. 
""I won't," Jake replied seriously. 
 "My mother says-" Hebroke it off. 
"She says what? 
"
"That I sleep like a dead man," Jake finished. 
 He looked atthe gunslinger, who saw that the boy's mouth was trembling as he
strove to keep back tears-only a boy,he thought, and pain smotehim, the icepick that too much cold water can sometimes plant 
in the forehead. 
 Only a boy. 
 Why? 
Silly question. 
 When a boy,wounded in body or spirit, called that question out to Cort, that

ancient, scarred battle-engine whose job it was to teach the sonsof gunslingers the beginning of what they had to know, Cort would
answer: Why is a crooked letter and can't be made straight . 
. 
. 
never mind why, just get up, pus-head! 
 Get up! 
 The day's young! 
"Why am I here? 
" Jake asked. 
 "Why did I forget everythingfrom before? 
""Because the man in black has drawn you here," the gun-slinger said. 
 "And because of the Tower. 
 The Tower stands at a
kind of . 
. 
. 
 power-nexus. 
 In time. 
""I don't understand that! 
"
"Nor do I," the gunslinger said. 
 "But something has beenhappening. 
 Just in my own time. 
 "The world has moved on,'we
say . 
. 
. 
 we've always said. 
 But it's moving on faster now. 
 Some-
thing has happened to time. 
 It's softening. 
"They sat in silence. 
 A breeze, faint but with an edge, pickedat their legs. 
 Somewhere it made a hollow whoooooin a rockfissure. 
"Where do you come from? 
" Jake asked. 

"From a place that no longer exists. 
 Do you know the Bible? 
"
"Jesus and Moses. 
 Sure. 
"
The gunslinger smiled. 
 "That's right. 
 My land had a Biblicalname-New Canaan, it was called. 
 The land of milk and honey. 

In the Bible's Canaan, there were supposed to be grapes so big
that men had to carry them on sledges. 
 We didn't grow them that
big, but it was sweet land. 
""I know about Ulysses," Jake said hesitantly. 
 "Was he in theBible? 
""Maybe," the gunslinger said. 
 "I was never a scholar of it, andcan't say for sure. 
""But the others . 
. 
. 
 your friends-"
"No others," the gunslinger said. 
 "I'm the last. 
"

A tiny wasted moon began to rise, casting its slitted gazedown into the tumble of rocks where they sat. 
"Was it pretty? 
 Your country . 
. 
. 
 your land? 
""It was beautiful," the gunslinger said. 
 "There were fields andforests and rivers and mists in the morning. 
 But that's only pretty. 

My mother used to say that the only real beauty is order and love
and light. 
"Jake made a noncommittal noise. 

The gunslinger smoked and thought of how it had been-thenights in the huge central hall, hundreds of richly clad figures
moving through the slow, steady waltz steps or the faster, light
ripples of the pol-kam,Aileen Ritter on his arm, the one his par-ents had chosen for him, he supposed, her eyes brighter than the
most precious gems, the light of the crystal-enclosed sparklights
shining in the newly done hair of the courtesans and their half-
cynical amours. 
 The hall had been huge, an island of light whose
age was beyond telling, as was the whole Central Place, which
was made up of nearly a hundred stone castles. 
 It had been un-
known years since he had seen it, and leaving for the last time,
Roland had ached as he turned his face away from it and began
his first cast for the trail of the man in black. 
 Even then the walls
had fallen, weeds grew in the courtyards, bats roosted amongst
the great beams of the central hall, and the galleries echoed with
the soft swoop and whisper of swallows. 
 The fields where Cort
had taught them archery and gunnery and falconry were gone to
hay and timothy and wild vines. 
 In the huge kitchen where Hax
had once held his fuming and aromatic court, a grotesque colony
of Slow Mutants nested, peering at him from the merciful dark-
ness of pantries and shadowed pillars. 
 The warm steam that had
been filled with the pungent odors of roasting beef and pork had
changed to the clammy damp of moss. 
 Giant white toadstools

grew in corners where not even the Slow Muties dared to en-camp. 
 The huge oak subcellar bulkhead stood open, and the most
poignant smell of all had issued from that, an odor that seemed to
express with a flat finality all the hard facts of dissolution and de-
cay: the high sharp odor of wine gone to vinegar. 
 It had been no
struggle to turn his face to the south and leave it behind-but it
had hurt his heart. 
"Was there a war? 
" Jake asked. 

"Even better," the gunslinger said and pitched the last smol-dering ember of his cigarette away. 
 "There was a revolution. 
 We
won every battle, and lost the war. 
 No one won the war, unless
maybe it was the scavengers. 
 There must have been rich pickings
for years after. 
""I wish I'd lived there," Jake said wistfully. 

"Do you say so? 
"
"I do. 
"
"Time to turn in, Jake. 
"
The boy, now only a dim shadow, turned on his side andcurled up with the blanket tossed loosely over him. 
 The gun-
slinger sat sentinel over him for perhaps an hour after, thinking
his long, sober thoughts. 
 Such meditation was a novel thing for
him, sweet in a melancholy sort of way, but still utterly without
practical value: there was no solution to the problem of Jake other
than the one the Oracle had offered-and turning away was sim-
ply not possible. 
 There might have been tragedy in the situation,
but the gunslinger did not see that; he saw only the predestination
that had always been there. 
 And finally, his more natural character
reasserted itself and he slept deeply, with no dreams. 


IXThe climb became grimmer on the following day as they contin-ued to angle toward the narrow V of the pass through the moun-
tains. 
 The gunslinger pushed slowly, still with no sense of hurry. 

The dead stone beneath their feet left no trace of the man in
black, but the gunslinger knew he had been this way before
them-and not only from the path of his climb as he and Jake had
observed him, tiny and bug-like, from the foothills. 
 His aroma
was printed on every cold down-draft of air. 
 It was an oily, sar-
donic odor, as bitter to the nose as the stench of the devil-grass. 
Jake's hair had grown much longer, and it curled slightly atthe base of his sunburned neck. 
 He climbed tough, moving with
sure-footedness and no apparent acrophobia as they crossed gaps
or scaled their way up ledged facings. 
 Twice already he'd gone up
in places the gunslinger could not have managed, and anchored
one of the ropes so the gunslinger could climb up hand over hand. 
The following morning they climbed through a coldly dampsnatch of cloud that blotted out the tumbled slopes below them. 

Patches of hard, granulated snow began to appear nestled in some
of the deeper pockets of stone. 
 It glittered like quartz and its tex-
ture was as dry as sand. 
 That afternoon they found a single foot-
print in one of these snowpatches. 
 Jake stared at it for a moment
with awful fascination, then looked up frightfully, as if expecting
to see the man in black materialize into his own footprint. 
 The
gunslinger tapped him on the shoulder then and pointed ahead. 

"Go. 
 The day's getting old. 
"Later, they made camp in the last of the daylight on a wide,flat ledge to the east and north of the cut that slanted into the
heart of the mountains. 
 The air was frigid; they could see the
puffs of their breath, and the humid sound of thunder in the red-
and-purple afterglow of the day was surreal, slightly lunatic. 


The gunslinger thought the boy might begin to question him,but there were no questions from Jake. 
 The boy fell almost im-mediately into sleep. 
 The gunslinger followed his example. 
 He
dreamed again of Jake as an alabaster saint with a nail through
his forehead. 
 He awoke with a gasp, tasting the cold thinness of
altitude in his lungs. 
 Jake was asleep beside him, but his sleep
was not easy; he twisted and mumbled to himself, chasing his
own phantoms. 
 The gunslinger lay over uneasily, and slept again. 
XA week after Jake saw the footstep, they faced the man in black
for a brief moment in time. 
 In that moment, the gunslinger felt he
could almost understand the implication of the Tower itself, for
that moment seemed to stretch out forever. 
They continued southeast, reaching a point perhaps halfwaythroughthe cyclopean mountain range, and just as the goingseemed about to become really difficult for the first time (above
them, seeming to lean out, the icy ledges and screaming buttes
made the gunslinger feel an unpleasant reverse vertigo), they be-
gan to descend again along the side of the narrow pass. 
 An angu-
lar zigzagging path led them toward a canyon floor where an
ice-edged stream boiled with slatey, headlong power from higher
country still. 
On that afternoon the boy paused and looked back at the gun-slinger, who had paused to wash his face in the stream. 
"I smell him," Jake said. 

"So do I. 
"
Ahead of them the mountain threw up its final defense-ahuge slab of insurmountable granite facing that climbed into
cloudy infinity. 
 At any moment the gunslinger expected a twist in

the stream to bring them upon a high waterfall and the insur-mountable smoothness of rock-dead end. 
 But the air here had
that odd magnifying quality that is common to high places, and it
was another day before they reached that great granite face. 
The gunslinger began to feel the tug of anticipation again, thefeeling that it was all finally in his grasp. 
 He'd been through this
before-many times-and still he had to fight himself to keep
from breaking into an eager trot. 
"Wait! 
" The boy had stopped suddenly. 
 They faced a sharpelbow-bend in the stream; it boiled and frothed around the eroded
hang of a giant sandstone boulder. 
 All that morning they had been
in the shadow of the mountains as the canyon narrowed. 
Jake was trembling violently and his face had gone pale. 

"What's the matter? 
"
"Let's go back," Jake whispered. 
 "Let's go back quick. 
"
The gunslinger's face was wooden. 

"Please? 
" The boy's face was drawn, and his jawline shookwith suppressed agony. 
 Through the heavy blanket of stone they
still heard thunder, as steady as machines in the earth. 
 The slice
of sky they could see had itself assumed a turbulent, gothic gray
above them as warm and cold currents met and warred. 
"Please, please! 
" The boy raised a fist, as if to strike the gun-slinger's chest. 
"No. 
"
The boy's face took on wonder. 
 "You're going to kill me. 
 Hekilled me the first time and you're going to kill me this time. 
 AndI think you know it. 
"The gunslinger felt the lie on his lips, then spoke it: "You'llbe all right. 
" And a greater lie yet. 
 "I'll take care. 
"Jake's face went gray, and he said no more. 
 He put an un-willing hand out, and he and the gunslinger went around the

elbow-bend that way, hand in hand. 
 On the other side they cameface-to-face with that final rising wall and the man in black. 
He stood no more than twenty feet above them, just to theright of the waterfall that crashed and spilled from a huge ragged
hole in the rock. 
 Unseen wind rippled and tugged at his hooded
robe. 
 He held a staff in one hand. 
 The other hand he held out to
them in a mocking gesture of welcome. 
 He seemed a prophet,
and below that rushing sky, mounted on a ledge of rock, a prophet
of doom, his voice the voice of Jeremiah. 
"Gunslinger! 
 How well you fulfill the prophecies of old! 
Good day and good day and good day! 
" He laughed and bowed,
the sound echoing over the bellow of the falling water. 
Without a thought the gunslinger had drawn his pistols. 
 Theboy cowered to his right and behind, a small shadow. 
Roland fired three times before he could gain control of histraitor hands-the echoes bounced their bronze tones against the
rock valley that rose around them, over the sound of the wind and
water. 
A spray of granite puffed over the head of the man in black; asecond to the left of his hood; a third to the right. 
 He had missed
cleanly all three times. 
The man in black laughed-a full, hearty laugh that seemedto challenge the receding echo of gunshots. 
 "Would you kill all
your answers so easily, gunslinger? 
""Come down," the gunslinger said. 
 "Do that I beg ya, andwe'll have answers all around. 
"Again that huge, derisive laugh. 
 "It's not your bullets I fear,Roland. 
 It's your idea of answers that scares me. 
""Come down. 
"
"We'll speak on the other side, I think," the man in black said. 
"On the other side we will hold much council and long palaver. 
"

His eyes flicked to Jake and he added:"Just the two of us. 
"
Jake flinched away from him with a small, whining cry, andthe man in black turned, his robe swirling in the gray air like a
batwing. 
 He disappeared into the cleft in the rock from which the
water spewed at full force. 
 The gunslinger exercised grim will
and did not send a bullet after him-would you kill all your an-swers so easily, gunslinger? 
There was only the sound of wind and water, a sound that hadbeen in this place of desolation for a thousand years. 
 Yet the man
in black had stood there. 
 Twelve years after his last glimpse,
Roland had seen him close-up again, had spoken to him. 
 And the
man in black had laughed. 
On the other side we will hold much council and longpalaver. 
The boy looked up at him, his body trembling. 
 For a momentthe gunslinger saw the face of Allie, the girl from Tull, superim-
posed over Jake's, the scar standing out on her forehead like a mute
accusation, and felt brute loathing for them both (it wouldn't oc-
cur to him until much later that both the scar on Alice's forehead
and the nail he saw spiked through Jake's forehead in his dreams
were in the same place). 
 Jake perhaps caught a whiff of his
thought; a moan slipped from his throat. 
 Then he twisted his lips
and cut the sound off. 
 He held the makings of a fine man, perhaps
a gunslinger in his own right if given time. 
Just the two of us. 

The gunslinger felt a great and unholy thirst in some deep un-known pit of his body, one no draft of water or wine could touch. 

Worlds trembled, almost within reach of his fingers, and in some
instinctual way he strove not to be corrupted, knowing in his
colder mind that such strife was vain and always would be. 
 In the
end there was only ka. 


It was noon. 
 He looked up, letting the cloudy, unsettled day-light shine for the last time on the all-too-vulnerable sun of hisown righteousness. 
 No one ever really pays for betrayal in silver,he thought. 
 The price of any betrayal always comes due in flesh. 
"Come with me or stay," the gunslinger said. 

The boy responded to this with a hard and humorless grin-his father's grin, had he but known it. 
 "And I'll be fine if I stay,"
he said. 
 "Fine all by myself, here in the mountains. 
 Someone will
come and save me. 
 They'll have cake and sandwiches. 
 Coffee in a
Thermos, too. 
 Do you say so? 
""Come with me or stay," the gunslinger repeated, and feltsomething happen in his mind. 
 An uncoupling. 
 That was the mo-
ment at which the small figure before him ceased to be Jake and
became only the boy, an impersonality to be moved and used. 
Something screamed in the windy stillness; he and the boyboth heard. 
The gunslinger began to climb, and after a moment Jakecame after. 
 Together they mounted the tumbled rock beside the
steely-cold falls, and stood where the man in black had stood be-
fore them. 
 And together they entered in where he had disap-
peared. 
 The darkness swallowed them. 

The SLOW MUTANTS

CHAPTER FOUR
The Slow Mutants
The gunslinger spoke slowly to Jake in the rising and falling in-flections of one who speaks in his sleep:"There were three of us that night: Cuthbert, Alain, and me. 
We weren't supposed to be there, because none of us had passed
from the time of children. 
 We were still in our clouts, as the say-
ing went. 
 If we'd been caught, Cort would have striped us bloody. 

But we weren't. 
 I don't think any of the ones that went before us
were caught, either. 
 Boys must put on their fathers'pants in pri-
vate, strut them in front of the mirror, and then sneak them back
on their hangers; it was like that. 
 The father pretends he doesn't
notice the new way the pants are hung up, or the traces of boot-
polish mustaches still under their noses. 
 Do you see? 
"The boy said nothing. 
 He'd said nothing since they hadpassed from the daylight. 
 The gunslinger, on the other hand, had
talked hectically, feverishly, to fill the silence. 
 He had not looked
back at the light as they passed into the land beneath the moun-
tains, but the boy had. 
 The gunslinger had read the failing of day
in the soft mirror of Jake's cheek: now faint rose, now milk-glass,
now pallid silver, now the last dusk-glow touch of evening, now
nothing. 
 The gunslinger had struck a false light and they had
gone on. 


Finally they camped. 
 No echo from the man in black re-turned to them. 
 Perhaps he had stopped to rest, too. 
 Or perhaps he floated onward and without running lights, through nighted
chambers. 
"The Sowing Night Cotillion-the Commala, some of theolder folk called it, after the word for rice-was held once a year
in the West'rd Hall," the gunslinger went on. 
 "The proper name
was The Hall of Grandfathers, but to us it was only the West'rd
Hall. 
"The sound of dripping water came to their ears. 

"A courting rite, as any spring dance surely is. 
" The gun-slinger laughed deprecatingly; the insensate walls turned the
sound into a loon-like wheeze. 
 "In the old days, the books say, it
was the welcoming of spring, what was sometimes called New
Earth or Fresh Commala. 
 But civilization, you know . 
. 
. 
"He trailed off, unable to describe the change inherent in thatfeatureless noun, the death of romance and the lingering of its
sterile, carnal revenant, a world living on the forced respiration 
of glitter and ceremony; the geometric steps of make-believe
courtship during the Sowing Night Cotil'that had replaced the
truer, madder, scribble-scrabble of love which he could only intuit
dimly; hollow grandeur in place of true passions which might
once have built kingdoms and sustained them. 
 He found the truth
with Susan Delgado in Mejis, only to lose it again. 
 Once therewas a king,he might have told the boy; the Eld whose blood, at-tenuated though it may be, still flows in my veins. 
 But kings are
done, lad. 
 In the world of light, anyway. 
"They made something decadent out of it," the gunslingersaid at last. 
 "A play. 
 A game. 
" In his voice was all the uncon-
scious distaste of the ascetic and the eremite. 
 His face, had there
been stronger light to illumine it, would have shown harshness
and sorrow, the purest kind of condemnation. 
 His essential force

had not been cut or diluted by the passage of years. 
 The lack ofimagination that still remained in that face was remarkable. 
"But the Ball," the gunslinger said. 
 "The Sowing Night Cotil'. 
. 
. 
"The boy did not speak, did not ask. 

"There were crystal chandeliers, heavy glass with electricsparklights. 
 It was all light, it was an island of light. 
"We sneaked into one of the old balconies, the ones that weresupposed to be unsafe and roped off. 
 But we were boys, and boys
will be boys, so they will. 
 To us everything was dangerous, but
what of that? 
 Had we not been made to live forever? 
 We thought
so, even when we spoke to each other of our glorious deaths. 
"We were above everyone and could look down on every-thing. 
 I don't remember that any of us said anything. 
 We only
drank it up with our eyes. 
"There was a great stone table where the gunslingers andtheir women sat at meat, watching the dancers. 
 A few of the gun-
slingers also danced, but only a few. 
 And they were the young
ones. 
 The one who sprang the trap on Hax was one of the
dancers, I seem to recall. 
 The elders only sat, and it seemed to 
me they were half embarrassed in all that light, all that civilized
light. 
 They were revered ones, the feared ones, the guardians, but
they seemed like hostlers in that crowd of cavaliers with their soft
women . 
. 
. 
"There were four circular tables loaded with food, and theyturned all the time. 
 The cooks'boys never stopped coming and
going from seven until three o'the clock the next morning. 
 The
tables were likeclocks, and we could smell roast pork, beef, lob-ster, chickens, baked apples. 
 The odors changed as the tables
turned. 
 There were ices and candies. 
 There were great flaming
skewers of meat. 
"Marten sat next to my mother and father-I knew them even

from so high above-and once she and Marten danced, slowlyand revolvingly, and the others cleared the floor for them and
clapped when it was over. 
 The gunslingers did not clap, but my
father stood slowly and held his hands out to her. 
 And she went to
him, smiling, holding out her own. 
"It was a moment of enormous gravity, even we felt it in ourhigh hiding place. 
 My father had by then taken control of his ka-
tet, you must ken-the Tet of the Gun-and was on the verge of
becoming Dinh of Gilead, if not all In-World. 
 The rest knew it. 

Marten knew it better than any . 
. 
. 
 except, perhaps, for Gabrielle
Verriss that was. 
"The boy spoke at last, and with seeming reluctance. 
 "She wasyour mother? 
""Aye. 
 Gabrielle-of-the-Waters, daughter of Alan, wife ofSteven, mother of Roland. 
" The gunslinger spread his hands apart
in a mocking little gesture that seemed to say Here I am, andwhat of it? 
Then he dropped them into his lap again. 
"My father was the last lord of light. 
"
The gunslinger looked down at his hands. 
 The boy said noth-ing more. 
"I remember how they danced," the gunslinger said. 
 "Mymother and Marten, the gunslingers'counselor. 
 I remember how
they danced, revolving slowly together and apart, in the old steps
of courtship. 
"He looked at the boy, smiling. 
 "But it meant nothing, youknow. 
 Because power had been passed in some way that none of
them knew but all understood, and my mother was grown root
and branch to the holder and wielder of that power. 
 Was it not so? 

She went to him when the dance was over, didn't she? 
 And
clasped his hands. 
 Did they applaud? 
 Did the hall ring with it as
those pretty boys and their soft ladies applauded and lauded him? 

Did it? 
 Did it? 
"

Bitter water dripped distantly in the darkness. 
 The boy saidnothing. 
"I remember how they danced," the gunslinger said softly. 
 "Iremember how they danced. 
" He looked up at the unseeable stoneroof and it seemed for a moment that he might scream at it, rail at
it, challenge it blindly-those blind and tongueless tonnages of
granite that now bore their tiny lives like microbes in its stone
intestine. 
"What hand could have held the knife that did my father tohis death? 
""I'm tired," the boy said, and then again said no more. 

The gunslinger lapsed into silence, and the boy laid over andput one hand between his cheek and the stone. 
 The little flame in
front of them guttered. 
 The gunslinger rolled a smoke. 
 It seemed
he could see the crystal light still, in the eye of his memory; hear
the shout of accolade, empty in a husked land that stood even
then hopeless against a gray ocean of time. 
 Remembering that is-
land of light hurt him bitterly, and he wished he had never held
witness to it, or to his father's cuckoldry. 
He passed smoke between his mouth and nostrils, lookingdown at the boy. 
 How we make large circles in earth for our-selves,he thought. 
 Around we go, back to the start and the start isthere again: resumption, which was ever the curse of daylight. 
How long before we see daylight again? 

He slept. 

After the sound of his breathing had become long and steadyand regular, the boy opened his eyes and looked at the gunslinger
with an expression of sickness and love. 
 The last light of the fire
caught in one pupil for a moment and was drowned there. 
 He
went to sleep. 


IIThe gunslinger had lost most of his time sense in the desert,which was changeless; he lost the rest of it here in the passage
under the mountains, which was lightless. 
 Neither of them had
any means of telling the clock, and the concept of hours became
meaningless, abnegate. 
 In a sense, they stood outside of time. 
 A
day might have been a week, or a week a day. 
 They walked, they
slept, they ate thin meals that did not satisfy their bellies. 
 Their
only companion was a steady thundering rush of the water, drill-
ing its auger path through the stone. 
 They followed it and drank
from its flat, mineral-salted depth, hoping there was nothing in it
that would make them sick or kill them. 
 At times the gunslinger
thought he saw fugitive drifting lights like corpse-lamps beneath
its surface, but supposed they were only projections of his brain,
which had not forgotten the light. 
 Still, he cautioned the boy not
to put his feet in the water. 
The range-finder in his head took them on steadily. 

The path beside the river (for it wasa path-smooth, sunkento a slight concavity) led always upward, toward the river's head. 

At regular intervals they came to curved stone pylons with sunken
ringbolts; perhaps once oxen or stagehorses had been tethered
there. 
 At each was a steel flagon holding an electric torch, but
these were all barren of life and light. 
During the third period of rest-before-sleep, the boy wan-dered away a little. 
 The gunslinger could hear small conversations
of rattled pebbles as Jake moved cautiously. 
"Careful," he said. 
 "You can't see where you are. 
"
"I'm crawling. 
 It's . 
. 
. 
 say! 
"
"What is it? 
" The gunslinger half crouched, touching the haftof one gun. 


There was a slight pause. 
 The gunslinger strained his eyesuselessly. 
"I think it's a railroad," the boy said dubiously. 
The gunslinger got up and walked toward the sound of Jake'svoice, leading with one foot lightly to test for pitfalls. 
"Here. 
" A hand reached out and cat's-pawed the gunslinger'sface. 
 The boy was very good in the dark, better than Roland him-
self. 
 His eyes seemed to dilate until there was no color left in
them: the gunslinger saw this as he struck a meager light. 
 There
was no fuel in this rock womb, and what they had brought with
them was going rapidly to ash. 
 At times the urge to strike a light
was well-nigh insatiable. 
 They had discovered one could grow as
hungry for light as for food. 
The boy was standing beside a curved rock wall that waslined with parallel metal staves running off into the darkness. 

Each carried black nodes that might once have been conductors
of electricity. 
 And beside and below, set only inches off the stone
floor, were tracks of bright metal. 
 What might have run on those
tracks at one time? 
 The gunslinger could only imagine sleek elec-
tric bullets, firing their courses through this forever night with af-
frighted searchlight eyes going before. 
 He had never heard of
such things, but there were many remnants of the gone world, just
as there were demons. 
 The gunslinger had once come upon a her-
mit who'd gained a quasi-religious power over a miserable flock
of kine-keepers by possession of an ancient gasoline pump. 
 The
hermit crouched beside it, one arm wrapped possessively around
it, and preached wild, guttering sermons. 
 He occasionally placed
the still-bright steel nozzle, which was attached to a rotted rubber
hose, between his legs. 
 On the pump, in perfectly legible (al-
though rust-clotted) letters, was a legend of unknown meaning:
AMOCO. 
 Lead Free. 
Amoco had become the totem of a thunder- god, and they had worshipped Him with the slaughter of sheepand the sound of engines: Rumm! 
 Rummm! 
 Rum-rum-rummmmm! 
Hulks, the gunslinger thought. 
 Only meaningless hulks pok-ing from sands that once were seas. 
And now a railroad. 

"We'll follow it," he said. 

The boy said nothing. 

The gunslinger extinguished the light and they slept. 

When Roland awoke, the boy was up before him, sitting onone of the rails and watching him sightlessly in the dark. 
They followed the rails like blindmen, Roland leading, Jakefollowing. 
 They slipped their feet along one rail always, also like
blindmen. 
 The steady rush of the river off to the right was their
companion. 
 They did not speak, and this went on for three peri-
ods of waking. 
 The gunslinger felt no urge to think coherently, or
to plan. 
 His sleep was dreamless. 
During the fourth period of waking and walking, they liter-ally stumbled on a handcar. 
The gunslinger ran into it chest-high, and the boy, walking onthe other side, struck his forehead and went down with a cry. 
The gunslinger made a light immediately. 
 "Are you all right? 
"The words sounded sharp, angry, and he winced at them. 
"Yes. 
" The boy was holding his head gingerly. 
 He shook itonce to make sure he had told the truth. 
 They turned to look at
what they had run into. 
It was a flat square plate of metal that sat mutely on thetracks. 
 There was a seesaw handle in the center of the square. 
 It
descended into a connection of cogs. 
 The gunslinger had no im-
mediate sense of the thing's purpose, but the boy grasped it at
once. 
"It's a handcar. 
"
"What? 
"

"Handcar," the boy said impatiently, "like in the old cartoons. 
Look. 
"He pulled himself up and went to the handle. 
 He managed topush it down, but it took all his weight hung over the handle toturn the trick. 
 The handcar moved a foot, with silent timelessness,
on the rails. 
"Good! 
" said a faint mechanical voice. 
 It made them bothjump. 
 "Good, push ag . 
. 
. 
" The mechanical voice died out. 
"It works a little hard," the boy said, as if apologizing for thething. 
The gunslinger pulled himself up beside Jake and shoved the handle down. 
 The handcar moved forward obediently, then
stopped. 
 "Good, push again! 
" the mechanical voice encouraged. 
He had felt a driveshaft turn beneath his feet. 
 The operationpleased him, and so did the mechanical voice (although he in-
tended to listen to thatno longer than necessary). 
 Other than thepump at the way station, this was the first machine he'd seen in
years that still worked well. 
 But the thing disquieted him, too. 
 It
would take them to their destination that much the quicker. 
 He
had no doubt whatever that the man in black had meant for them
to find this, too. 
"Neat, huh? 
" the boy said, and his voice was full of loathing. 
The silence was deep. 
 Roland could hear his organs at work in-
side his body, and the drip of water, and nothing else. 
"You stand on one side, I stand on the other," Jake said. 
"You'll have to push by yourself until it gets rolling good. 
 Then I
can help. 
 First you push, then I push. 
 We'll go right along. 
 Get it? 
""I get it," the gunslinger said. 
 His hands were in helpless, de-spairing fists. 
"But you'll have to push by yourself until it gets rollinggood," the boy repeated, looking at him. 
The gunslinger had a sudden vivid picture of the Great Hall a

year or so after the Sowing Night Cotillion. 
 By then it had beennothing but shattered shards in the wake of revolt, civil strife, and
invasion. 
 This image was followed by one of Allie, the scarred
woman from Tull, pushed and pulled by bullets that were killing
her for no reason at all . 
. 
. 
 unless reflex was a reason. 
 Next came
Cuthbert Allgood's face, laughing as he went downhill to his
death, still blowing that gods-damned horn . 
. 
. 
 and then he 
saw Susan's face, twisted, made ugly with weeping. 
 All my oldfriends,the gunslinger thought, and smiled hideously. 
"I'll push," the gunslinger said. 

He began to push, and when the voice began to speak ("Good,push again! 
 Good, push again! 
") he sent his hand fumbling along
the post upon which the seesaw handle had been balanced. 
 At last
he found what he was surely looking for: a button. 
 He pushed it. 
"Goodbye, pal! 
" the mechanical voice said cheerily, and wasthen blessedly silent for some hours. 
IIIThey rolled on through the dark, faster now, no longer having to
feel their way. 
 The mechanical voice spoke up once, suggesting
they eat Crisp-A-La, and again to say that nothing satisfied at the
end of a hard day like Larchies. 
 Following this second piece of
advice, it spoke no more. 
Once the awkwardness of a buried age had been run off thehandcar, it went smoothly. 
 The boy tried to do his share, and the
gunslinger allowed him small shifts, but mostly he pumped by
himself, in large and chest-stretching risings and fallings. 
 The un-
derground river was their companion, sometimes closer on their
right, sometimes further away. 
 Once it took on huge and thunderous hollowness, as if passing through some great cathedralnarthex. 
 Once the sound of it disappeared almost altogether. 
The speed and the made wind against their faces seemed totake the place of sight and to drop them once again into a frame
of time. 
 The gunslinger estimated they were making anywhere
from ten to fifteen miles an hour, always on a shallow, almost im-
perceptible uphill grade that wore him out deceptively. 
 When they
stopped he slept like the stone itself. 
 Their food was almost gone
again. 
 Neither of them worried about it. 
For the gunslinger, the tenseness of a coming climax was as imperceivable but as real (and accretive) as the fatigue of
propelling the handcar. 
 They were close to the end of the begin-
ning . 
. 
. 
 or at least hewas. 
 He felt like a performer placed on cen-ter stage minutes before the rise of the curtain; settled in position
with his first line held securely in his mind, he heard the unseen
audience rattling programs and settling in their seats. 
 He lived
with a tight, tidy ball of unholy anticipation in his belly and wel-
comed the exercise that let him sleep. 
 And when he didsleep, itwas like the dead. 
The boy spoke less and less, but at their stopping place onesleep-period not long before they were attacked by the Slow Mu-
tants, he asked the gunslinger almost shyly about his coming of age. 
"For I would hear more of that," he said. 

The gunslinger had been leaning with his back against thehandle, a cigarette from his dwindling supply of tobacco clamped
in his lips. 
 He'd been on the verge of his usual unthinking sleep
when the boy asked his question. 
"Why would thee sill to know that? 
" he asked, amused. 

The boy's voice was curiously stubborn, as if hiding embar-rassment. 
 "I just would. 
" And after a pause, he added: "I always
wondered about growing up. 
 I bet it's mostly lies. 
"

"What you'd hear of wasn't my growing-up," the gunslingersaid. 
 "I suppose I did the first of that not long afterwhat thee'dhear of-""When you fought your teacher," Jake said remotely. 
 "That'swhat I want to hear. 
"Roland nodded. 
 Yes, of course, the day he had tried the line;that was a story any boy might want to hear, all right. 
 "My realgrowing-up didn't start until after my Da'sent me away. 
 I finished
doing it at one place and another along the way. 
" He paused. 
 "I
saw a not-man hung once. 
""A not-man? 
 I don't understand. 
"
"You could feel him but couldn't see him. 
"
Jake nodded, seeming to understand. 
 "He was invisible. 
"
Roland raised his eyebrows. 
 He had never heard the word be-fore. 
 "Do you say so? 
""Yes. 
"
"Then let it be so. 
 In any case, there were folk who didn'twant me to do it-felt they'd be cursed if I did it, but the fellow
had gotten a taste for rape. 
 Do you know what that is? 
""Yes," Jake said. 
 "And I bet an invisible guy would be good atit, too. 
 How did you catch him? 
""That's a tale for another day. 
" Knowing there would be noother days. 
 Both of them knowing there would be no others. 
 "Two
years after that, I left a girl in a place called King's Town, al-
though I didn't want to-""Sure you did," the boy said, and the contempt in his voicewas no less for the softness of his tone. 
 "Got to catch up with that
Tower, am I right? 
 Got to keep a-ridin', just like the cowboys on
my Dad's Network. 
"Roland felt his face flush with heat in the dark, but when hespoke his voice was even. 
 "That was the last part, I guess. 
 Of my

growing-up, I mean. 
 I never knew any of the parts when they hap-pened. 
 Only later did I know that. 
"He realized with some unease that he was avoiding what theboy wanted to hear. 
"I suppose the coming of age waspart of it, at that," he said,almost grudgingly. 
 "It was formal. 
 Almost stylized; like a dance. 
"
He laughed unpleasantly. 
The boy said nothing. 

"It was necessary to prove one's self in battle," the gunslingerbegan. 
IVSummer, and hot. 
Full Earth had come to the land like a vampire lover that year,killing the land and the crops of the tenant farmers, turning the
fields of the castle-city of Gilead white and sterile. 
 In the west,
some miles distant and near the borders that were the end of the
civilized world, fighting had already begun. 
 All reports were bad,
and all of them paled to insignificance before the heat that rested
over this place of the center. 
 Cattle lolled empty-eyed in the pens
of the stockyards. 
 Pigs grunted lustlessly, unmindful of sows and
sex and knives whetted for the coming fall. 
 People whined about
taxes and conscription, as they always did; but there was an apa-
thy beneath the empty passion-play of politics. 
 The center had
frayed like a rag rug that had been washed and walked on and
shaken and hung and dried. 
 The thread that held the last jewel at
the breast of the world was unraveling. 
 Things were not holding
together. 
 The earth drew in its breath in the summer of the com-
ing eclipse. 


The boy idled along the upper corridor of this stone placewhich was home, sensing these things, not understanding. 
 He wasalso dangerous and empty, waiting to be filled. 
It was three years since the hanging of the cook who had al-ways been able to find snacks for hungry boys; Roland had
lengthened and filled out both at shoulder and hip. 
 Now, dressed
only in faded denim pants, fourteen years old, he had come to
look like the man he would become: lean and lank and quick on
his feet. 
 He was still unbedded, but two of the younger slatterns
of a West-Town merchant had cast eyes on him. 
 He had felt a re-
sponse and felt it more strongly now. 
 Even in the coolness of the
passage, he felt sweat on his body. 
Ahead were his mother's apartments and he approached themincuriously, meaning only to pass them and go upward to the
roof, where a thin breeze and the pleasure of his hand awaited. 
He had passed the door when a voice called him: "You. 
 Boy. 
"
It was Marten, the counselor. 
 He was dressed with a suspi-cious, upsetting casualness-black whipcord trousers almost as
tight as leotards, and a white shirt open halfway down his hairless
chest. 
 His hair was tousled. 
The boy looked at him silently. 

"Come in, come in! 
 Don't stand in the hall! 
 Your motherwants to speak to you. 
" He was smiling with his mouth, but the
lines of his face held a deeper, more sardonic humor. 
 Beneath
that-and in his eyes-there was only coldness. 
In truth, his mother did not seem to want to see him. 
 She satin the low-backed chair by the large window in the central parlor
of her apartments, the one which overlooked the hot blank stone
of the central courtyard. 
 She was dressed in a loose, informal
gown that kept slipping from one white shoulder and looked at
the boy only once-a quick, glinting rueful smile, like autumn



sun on a rill of water. 
 During the interview which followed, shestudied her hands rather than her son. 
He saw her seldom now, and the phantom of cradle songs
(chussit, chissit, chassit)
had almost faded from his brain. 
 But she was a belovedstranger. 
 He felt an amorphous fear, and an inchoate hatred for
Marten, his father's closest advisor, was born. 
"Are you well, Ro'? 
" she asked him softly. 
 Marten stood be-side her, a heavy, disturbing hand near the juncture of her white
shoulder and white neck, smiling on them both. 
 His brown eyes
were dark to the point of blackness with smiling. 
"Yes," he said. 

"Your studies go well? 
 Vannay is pleased? 
 And Cort? 
" Hermouth quirked at this second name, as if she had tasted some-
thing bitter. 
"I'm trying," he said. 
 They both knew he was not flashinglyintelligent like Cuthbert, or even quick like Jamie. 
 He was a plod-
der and a bludgeoner. 
 Even Alain was better at studies. 
"And David? 
" She knew his affection for the hawk. 

The boy looked up at Marten, still smiling paternally downon all this. 
 "Past his prime. 
"His mother seemed to wince; for a moment Marten's faceseemed to darken, his grip on her shoulder to tighten. 
 Then she
looked out into the hot whiteness of the day, and all was as it had
been. 
It's a charade,he thought. 
 A game. 
 Who is playing with whom? 
"You have a cut on your forehead," Marten said, still smiling,and pointed a negligent finger at the mark of Cort's latest(thank you for this instructive day)
bashing. 
 "Are you going to be a fighter like your father or areyou just slow? 
"

This time she did wince. 
"Both," the boy said. 
 He looked steadily at Marten and smiledpainfully. 
 Even in here, it was very hot. 
Marten stopped smiling abruptly. 
 "You can go to the roofnow, boy. 
 I believe you have business there. 
""My mother has not yet dismissed me, bondsman! 
"
Marten's face twisted as if the boy had lashed him with aquirt. 
 The boy heard his mother's dreadful, woeful gasp. 
 She
spoke his name. 
But the painful smile remained intact on the boy's face and hestepped forward. 
 "Will you give me a sign of fealty, bondsman? 

In the name of my father whom you serve? 
"Marten stared at him, rankly unbelieving. 

"Go," Marten said gently. 
 "Go and find your hand. 
"
Smiling rather horribly, the boy went. 

As he closed the door and went back the way he came, heheard his mother wail. 
 It was a banshee sound. 
 And then, unbe-
lievably, the sound of his father's man striking her and telling her
to shut her quack. 
To shut her quack! 

And then he heard Marten's laugh. 

The boy continued to smile as he went to his test. 
VJamie had come from the shops, and when he saw the boy cross-
ing the exercise yard, he ran to tell Roland the latest gossip of
bloodshed and revolt to the west. 
 But he fell aside, the words all
unspoken. 
 They had known each other since the time of infancy,
and as boys they had dared each other, cuffed each other, and

made a thousand explorations of the walls within which they hadboth been birthed. 
The boy strode past him, staring without seeing, grinning hispainful grin. 
 He was walking toward Cort's cottage, where the
shades were drawn to ward off the savage afternoon heat. 
 Cort
napped in the afternoon so that he could enjoy to the fullest ex-
tent his evening tomcat forays into the mazed and filthy brothels
of the lower town. 
Jamie knew in a flash of intuition, knew what was to come,and in his fear and ecstasy he was torn between following Roland
and going after the others. 
Then his hypnotism was broken and he ran toward the mainbuildings, screaming, "Cuthbert! 
 Alain! 
 Thomas! 
" His screams
sounded puny and thin in the heat. 
 They had known, all of them,
in that intuitive way boys have, that Roland would be the first of
them to try the line. 
 But this was too soon. 
The hideous grin on Roland's face galvanized him as no newsof wars, revolts, and witchcrafts could have done. 
 This was more
than words from a toothless mouth given over fly-specked heads
of lettuce. 
Roland walked to the cottage of his teacher and kicked thedoor open. 
 It slammed backward, hit the plain rough plaster of
the wall, and rebounded. 
He had never been inside before. 
 The entrance opened on anaustere kitchen that was cool and brown. 
 A table. 
 Two straight
chairs. 
 Two cabinets. 
 A faded linoleum floor, tracked in black
paths from the cooler set in the floor to the counter where knives
hung, and to the table. 
Here was a public man's privacy. 
 The faded refuge of a vio-lent midnight carouser who had loved the boys of three genera-
tions roughly, and made some of them into gunslingers. 


"Cort! 
"He kicked the table, sending it across the room and into thecounter. 
 Knives from the wall rack fell in twinkling jackstraws. 
There was a thick stirring in the other room, a half-sleepclearing of the throat. 
 The boy did not enter, knowing it was
sham, knowing that Cort had awakened immediately in the cot-
tage's other room and stood with one glittering eye beside the
door, waiting to break the intruder's unwary neck. 
"Cort, I want you, bondsman! 
"
Now he spoke the High Speech, and Cort swung the dooropen. 
 He was dressed in thin underwear shorts, a squat man with
bow legs, runneled with scars from top to toe, thick with twists of
muscle. 
 There was a round, bulging belly. 
 The boy knew from ex-
perience that it was spring steel. 
 The one good eye glared at him
from the bashed and dented hairless head. 
The boy saluted formally. 
 "Teach me no more, bondsman. 
 To-day I teach you. 
""You are early, puler," Cort said casually, but he also spokethe High Speech. 
 "Two years early at the very best, I should
judge. 
 I will ask only once. 
 Will you cry off? 
"The boy only smiled his hideous, painful smile. 
 For Cort,who had seen the smile on a score of bloodied, scarlet-skied fields
of honor and dishonor, it was answer enough-perhaps the only
answer he would have believed. 
"It's too bad," the teacher said absently. 
 "You have been amost promising pupil-the best in two dozen years, I should say. 

It will be sad to see you broken and set upon a blind path. 
 But the
world has moved on. 
 Bad times are on horseback. 
"The boy still did not speak (and would have been incapable ofany coherent explanation, had it been required), but for the first
time the awful smile softened a little. 
"Still, there is the line of blood," Cort said, "revolt and witch-

craft to the west or no. 
 I am your bondsman, boy. 
 I recognize yourcommand and bow to it now-if never again-with all my heart. 
"And Cort, who had cuffed him, kicked him, bled him, cursedhim, made mock of him, and called him the very eye of syphilis,
bent to one knee and bowed his head. 
The boy touched the leathery, vulnerable flesh of his neckwith wonder. 
 "Rise, bondsman. 
 In love. 
"Cort stood slowly, and there might have been pain behind theimpassive mask of his reamed features. 
 "This is waste. 
 Cry off,
you foolish boy. 
 I break my own oath. 
 Cry off and wait. 
"The boy said nothing. 

"Very well; if you say so, let it be so. 
" Cort's voice be-came dry and business-like. 
 "One hour. 
 And the weapon of your
choice. 
""You will bring your stick? 
"
"I always have. 
"
"How many sticks have been taken from you, Cort? 
" Whichwas tantamount to asking: How many boys have entered the
square yard beyond the Great Hall and returned as gunslinger
apprentices? 
"No stick will be taken from me today," Cort said slowly. 
 "Iregret it. 
 There is only the once, boy. 
 The penalty for overeager-
ness is the same as the penalty for unworthiness. 
 Can you not
wait? 
"The boy recalled Marten standing over him. 
 The smile. 
 Andthe sound of the blow from behind the closed door. 
 "No. 
""Very well. 
 What weapon do you choose? 
"
The boy said nothing. 

Cort's smile showed a jagged ring of teeth. 
 "Wise enough tobegin. 
 In an hour. 
 You realize you will in all probability never see
your father, your mother, or your ka-babbies again? 
""I know what exile means," Roland said softly. 


"Go now, and meditate on your father's face. 
 Much good willit do ya. 
"The boy went, without looking back. 
VIThe cellar of the barn was spuriously cool, dank, smelling of cob-webs and earthwater. 
 The sun lit it in dusty rays from narrow win-
dows, but here was none of the day's heat. 
 The boy kept the hawk
here and the bird seemed comfortable enough. 
David no longer hunted the sky. 
 His feathers had lost the radi-ant animal brightness of three years ago, but the eyes were still as
piercing and motionless as ever. 
 You cannot friend a hawk, they
said, unless you are half a hawk yourself, alone and only a so-
journer in the land, without friends or the need of them. 
 The hawk
pays no coinage to love or morals. 
David was an old hawk now. 
 The boy hoped that he himselfwas a young one. 
"Hai," he said softly and extended his arm to the tetheredperch. 
The hawk stepped onto the boy's arm and stood motionless,unhooded. 
 With his other hand the boy reached into his pocket
and fished out a bit of dried jerky. 
 The hawk snapped it deftly
from between his fingers and made it disappear. 
The boy began to stroke David very carefully. 
 Cort mostprobably would not have believed it if he had seen it, but Cort did
not believe the boy's time had come, either. 
"I think you die today," he said, continuing to stroke. 
 "I thinkyou will be made a sacrifice, like all those little birds we trained
you on. 
 Do you remember? 
 No? 
 It doesn't matter. 
 After today I

am the hawk and each year on this day I'll shoot the sky in yourmemory. 
"David stood on his arm, silent and unblinking, indifferent tohis life or death. 
"You are old," the boy said reflectively. 
 "And perhaps not myfriend. 
 Even a year ago you would have had my eyes instead of
that little string of meat, isn't it so? 
 Cort would laugh. 
 But if we
get close enough . 
. 
. 
 close enough to that chary man . 
. 
. 
 if he
don't suspect . 
. 
. 
 which will it be, David? 
 Age or friendship? 
"David did not say. 

The boy hooded him and found the jesses, which were loopedat the end of David's perch. 
 They left the barn. 
VIIThe yard behind the Great Hall was not really a yard at all, but
only a green corridor whose walls were formed by tangled, thick-
grown hedges. 
 It had been used for the rite of coming of age
since time out of mind, long before Cort and his predecessor,
Mark, who had died of a stab-wound from an overzealous hand in
this place. 
 Many boys had left the corridor from the east end,
where the teacher always entered, as men. 
 The east end faced the
Great Hall and all the civilization and intrigue of the lighted
world. 
 Many more had slunk away, beaten and bloody, from the
west end, where the boys always entered, as boys forever. 
 The
west end faced the farms and the hut-dwellers beyond the farms;
beyond that, the tangled barbarian forests; beyond that, Garlan;
and beyond Garlan, the Mohaine Desert. 
 The boy who became a
man progressed from darkness and unlearning to light and re-
sponsibility. 
 The boy who was beaten could only retreat, forever

and forever. 
 The hallway was as smooth and green as a gamingfield. 
 It was exactly fifty yards long. 
 In the middle was a swatch
of shaven earth. 
 This was the line. 
Each end was usually clogged with tense spectators and rela-tives, for the ritual was usually forecast with great accuracy-
eighteen was the most common age (those who had not made
their test by the age of twenty-five usually slipped into obscurity
as freeholders, unable to face the brutal all-or-nothing fact of 
the field and the test). 
 But on this day there were none but Jamie
DeCurry, Cuthbert Allgood, Alain Johns, and Thomas Whit-
man. 
 They clustered at the boy's end, gape-mouthed and frankly
terrified. 
"Your weapon, stupid! 
" Cuthbert hissed, in agony. 
 "You for-got your weapon! 
""I have it," the boy said. 
 Dimly he wondered if the news ofthis lunacy had reached yet to the central buildings, to his
mother-and to Marten. 
 His father was on a hunt, not due back
for days. 
 In this he felt a sense of shame, for he felt that in his fa-
ther he would have found understanding, if not approval. 
 "Has
Cort come? 
""Cort is here. 
" The voice came from the far end of the corri-dor, and Cort stepped into view, dressed in a short singlet. 
 A
heavy leather band encircled his forehead to keep sweat from his
eyes. 
 He wore a dirty girdle to hold his back straight. 
 He held an
ironwood stick in one hand, sharp on one end, heavily blunted
and spatulate on the other. 
 He began the litany which all of them,
chosen by the blind blood of their fathers all the way back to the
Eld, had known since early childhood, learned against the day
when they would, perchance, become men. 
"Have you come here for a serious purpose, boy? 
"
"I have come for a serious purpose. 
"

"Have you come as an outcast from your father's house? 
""I have so come. 
" And would remain outcast until he hadbested Cort. 
 If Cort bested him, he would remain outcast forever. 
"Have you come with your chosen weapon? 
"
"I have. 
"
"What is your weapon? 
" This was the teacher's advantage, his chance to adjust his plan of battle to the sling or spear or bah
or bow. 
"My weapon is David. 
"
Cort halted only briefly. 
 He was surprised, and very likelyconfused. 
 That was good. 
Mightbe good. 
"So then have you at me, boy? 
"
"I do. 
"
"In whose name? 
"
"In the name of my father. 
"
"Say his name. 
"
"Steven Deschain, of the line of Eld. 
"
"Be swift, then. 
"
And Cort advanced into the corridor, switching his stick fromone hand to the other. 
 The boys sighed flutteringly, like birds, as
their dan-dinh stepped to meet him. 
My weapon is David, teacher. 

Did Cort understand? 
 And if so, did he understand fully? 
 Ifhe did, very likely all was lost. 
 It turned on surprise-and on
whatever stuff the hawk had left in him. 
 Would he only sit, disin-
terested and stupid, on the boy's arm, while Cort struck him
brainless with the ironwood? 
 Or seek escape in the high, hot sky? 
As they drew close together, each for the nonce still on hisside of the line, the boy loosened the hawk's hood with nerve-
less fingers. 
 It dropped to the green grass, and Cort halted in 

his tracks. 
 He saw the old warrior's eyes drop to the bird andwiden with surprise and slow-dawning comprehension. 
 Nowheunderstood. 
"Oh, you little fool," Cort nearly groaned, and Roland wassuddenly furious that he should be spoken to so. 
"At him! 
" he cried, raising his arm. 

And David flew like a silent brown bullet, stubby wingspumping once, twice, three times, before crashing into Cort's
face, talons searching, beak digging. 
 Red drops flew up into the
hot air. 
"Hai! 
 Roland! 
" Cuthbert screamed deliriously. 
 "First blood! 
First blood to my bosom! 
" He struck his chest hard enough to
leave a bruise there that would not fade for a week. 
Cort staggered backwards, off balance. 
 The ironwood staffrose and beat futilely at the air about his head. 
 The hawk was an
undulating, blurred bundle of feathers. 
The boy, meanwhile, arrowed forward, his hand held out in astraight wedge, his elbow locked. 
 This was his chance, and very
likely the only one he'd have. 
Still, Cort was almost too quick for him. 
 The bird had coveredninety percent of his vision, but the ironwood came up again,
spatulate end forward, and Cort coldbloodly performed the only
action that could turn events at that point. 
 He beat his own face
three times, biceps flexing mercilessly. 
David fell away, broken and twisted. 
 One wing flapped franti-cally at the ground. 
 His cold, predator's eyes stared fiercely into
the teacher's bloody, streaming face. 
 Cort's bad eye now bulged
blindly from its socket. 
The boy delivered a kick to Cort's temple, connecting solidly. 
It should have ended it, but it did not. 
 For a moment Cort's face
went slack; and then he lunged, grabbing for the boy's foot. 


The boy skipped back and tripped over his own feet. 
 He wentdown asprawl. 
 He heard, from far away, the sound of Jamiescreaming in dismay. 
Cort was ready to fall on him and finish it. 
 Roland had losthis advantage and both of them knew it. 
 For a moment they
looked at each other, the teacher standing over the pupil with
gouts of blood pouring from the left side of his face, the bad eye
now closed except for a thin slit of white. 
 There would be no
brothels for Cort this night. 
Something ripped jaggedly at the boy's hand. 
 It was David,tearing blindly at whatever he could reach. 
 Both wings were bro-
ken. 
 It was incredible that he still lived. 
The boy grabbed him like a stone, unmindful of the jabbing,diving beak that was taking the flesh from his wrist in ribbons. 
 
As Cort flew at him, all spread-eagled, the boy threw the hawk
upward. 
"Hai! 
 David! 
 Kill! 
"
Then Cort blotted out the sun and came down atop of him. 
VIIIThe bird was smashed between them, and the boy felt a callused
thumb probe for the socket of his eye. 
 He turned it, at the same
time bringing up the slab of his thigh to block Cort's crotch-
seeking knee. 
 His own hand flailed against the tree of Cort's neck
in three hard chops. 
 It was like hitting ribbed stone. 
Then Cort made a thick grunting. 
 His body shuddered. 
Faintly, the boy saw one hand flailing for the dropped stick, and
with a jackknifing lunge, he kicked it out of reach. 
 David had
hooked one talon into Cort's right ear. 
 The other battered merci-

lessly at the teacher's cheek, making it a ruin. 
 Warm blood splat-tered the boy's face, smelling of sheared copper. 
Cort's fist struck the bird once, breaking its back. 
 Again, andthe neck snapped away at a crooked angle. 
 And still the talon
clutched. 
 There was no ear now; only a red hole tunneled into the
side of Cort's skull. 
 The third blow sent the bird flying, at last
clearing Cort's face. 
The moment it was clear, the boy brought the edge of hishand across the bridge of his teacher's nose, using every bit of his
strength and breaking the thin bone. 
 Blood sprayed. 
Cort's grasping, unseeing hand ripped at the boy's buttocks,trying to pull his trousers down, trying to hobble him. 
 Roland
rolled away, found Cort's stick, and rose to his knees. 
Cort came to his own knees, grinning. 
 Incredibly, they facedeach other that way from either side of the line, although they had
switched positions and Cort was now on the side where Roland
had begun the contest. 
 The old warrior's face was curtained with
gore. 
 The one seeing eye rolled furiously in its socket. 
 The nose
was smashed over to a haunted, leaning angle. 
 Both cheeks hung
in flaps. 
The boy held the man's stick like a Gran'Points player wait-ing for the pitch of the rawhide bird. 
Cort double-feinted, then came directly at him. 

Roland was ready, not fooled in the slightest by this last trick,which both knew was a poor one. 
 The ironwood swung in a flat
arc, striking Cort's skull with a dull thudding noise. 
 Cort fell on
his side, looking at the boy with a lazy unseeing expression. 
 A
tiny trickle of spit came from his mouth. 
"Yield or die," the boy said. 
 His mouth was filled with wetcotton. 
And Cort smiled. 
 Nearly all consciousness was gone, and he

would remain tended in his cottage for a week afterward,wrapped in the blackness of a coma, but now he held on with all
the strength of his pitiless, shadowless life. 
 He saw the need to
palaver in the boy's eyes, and even with a curtain of blood be-
tween the two of them, understood that the need was desperate. 
"I yield, gunslinger. 
 I yield smiling. 
 You have this day remem-bered the face of your father and all those who came before him. 

What a wonder you have done! 
"Cort's clear eye closed. 

The gunslinger shook him gently, but with persistence. 
 Theothers were around him now, their hands trembling to thump his
back and hoist him to their shoulders; but they held back, afraid,
sensing a new gulf. 
 Yet this was not as strange as it could have
been, because there had always been a gulf between this one and
the rest. 
Cort's eye rolled open again. 

"The key," the gunslinger said. 
 "My birthright, teacher. 
 I need it. 
"His birthright was the guns, not the heavy ones of his father-weighted with sandalwood-but guns, all the same. 
 Forbidden to
all but a few. 
 In the heavy vault under the barracks where he by
ancient law was now required to abide, away from his mother's
breast, hung his apprentice weapons, heavy cumbersome barrel-
shooters of steel and nickel. 
 Yet they had seen his father through
his apprenticeship, and his father now ruled-at least in name. 
"Is your need so fearsome, then? 
" Cort muttered, as if in hissleep. 
 "So pressing? 
 Aye, I feared so. 
 So much need should have
made you stupid. 
 And yet you won. 
""The key. 
"
"The hawk was a fine ploy. 
 A fine weapon. 
 How long did ittake you to train the bastard? 
"

"I never trained David. 
 I friended him. 
 The key. 
""Under my belt, gunslinger. 
" The eye closed again. 

The gunslinger reached under Cort's belt, feeling the heavypress of the man's belly, the huge muscles there now slack and
asleep. 
 The key was on a brass ring. 
 He clutched it in his hand, re-
straining the mad urge to thrust it up to the sky in a salutation of
victory. 
He got to his feet and was finally turning to the others whenCort's hand fumbled for his foot. 
 For a moment the gunslinger
feared some last attack and tensed, but Cort only looked up at
him and beckoned with one crusted finger. 
"I'm going to sleep now," Cort whispered calmly. 
 "I'm goingto walk the path. 
 Perhaps all the way to the clearing at the end of
it, I don't know. 
 I teach you no more, gunslinger. 
 You have sur-
passed me, and two years younger than your father, who was the
youngest. 
 But let me counsel. 
""What? 
" Impatiently. 

"Wipe that look off your face, maggot. 
"
In his surprise, Roland did as he was bid (although, beingcrouched hidden behind his face as we all are, could not know it). 
Cort nodded, then whispered a single word. 
 "Wait. 
"
"What? 
"
The effort it took the man to speak lent his words great em-phasis. 
 "Let the word and the legend go before you. 
 There are
those who will carry both. 
" His eyes flicked over the gunslinger's
shoulder. 
 "Fools, perchance. 
 Let your shadow grow hair on its
face. 
 Let it become dark. 
" He smiled grotesquely. 
 "Given time,
words may even enchant an enchanter. 
 Do you take my meaning,
gunslinger? 
""Yes. 
 I think I do. 
"
"Will you take my last counsel as your teacher? 
"

The gunslinger rocked back on his heels, a hunkered, think-ing posture that foreshadowed the man. 
 He looked at the sky. 
 Itwas deepening, purpling. 
 The heat of the day was failing and
thunderheads in the west foretold rain. 
 Lightning tines jabbed the
placid flank of the rising foothills miles distant. 
 Beyond that, the
mountains. 
 Beyond that, the rising fountains of blood and unrea-
son. 
 He was tired, tired into his bones and beyond. 
He looked back at Cort. 
 "I will bury my hawk tonight,teacher. 
 And later go into lower town to inform those in the broth-
els that will wonder about you. 
 Perhaps I will comfort one or two
a little. 
"Cort's lips parted in a pained smile. 
 And then he slept. 

The gunslinger got to his feet and turned to the others. 
 "Makea litter and take him to his house. 
 Then bring a nurse. 
 No, two
nurses. 
 Okay? 
"They still watched him, caught in a bated moment that noneof them could immediately break. 
 They still looked for a corona
of fire, or a magical change of features. 
"Two nurses," the gunslinger repeated, and then smiled. 
 Theysmiled in return. 
 Nervously. 
"You goddamned horse drover! 
" Cuthbert suddenly yelled,grinning. 
 "You haven't left enough meat for the rest of us to pick
off the bone! 
""The world won't move on tomorrow," the gunslinger said,quoting the old adage with a smile. 
 "Alain, you butter-butt! 
 Move
your freight. 
"Alain set about the business of making the litter; Thomas andJamie went together to the main hall and the infirmary. 
The gunslinger and Cuthbert looked at each other. 
 They hadalways been the closest-or as close as they could be under the
particular shades of their characters. 
 There was a speculative,

open light in Bert's eyes, and the gunslinger controlled only withgreat difficulty the need to tell him not to call for the test for a
year or even eighteen months, lest he go west. 
 But they had been
through a great ordeal together, and the gunslinger did not feel he
could risk saying such a thing without a look on his face that
might be taken for arrogance. 
 I've begun to scheme,he thought,and was a little dismayed. 
 Then he thought of Marten, of his
mother, and he smiled a deceiver's smile at his friend. 
I am to be the first,he thought, knowing it for the first time,although he had thought of it idly many times before. 
 Iam thefirst. 
"Let's go," he said. 

"With pleasure, gunslinger. 
"
They left by the east end of the hedge-bordered corridor;Thomas and Jamie were returning with the nurses already. 
 They
looked like ghosts in their white and gauzy summer robes, crossed
at the breast with red. 
"Shall I help you with the hawk? 
" Cuthbert asked. 

"Yes," the gunslinger said. 
 "That would be lovely, Bert. 
"
And later, when darkness had come and the rushing thunder-showers with it; while huge, phantom caissons rolled across the
sky and lightning washed the crooked streets of the lower town in
blue fire; while horses stood at hitching rails with their heads
down and their tails drooping, the gunslinger took a woman and
lay with her. 
It was quick and good. 
 When it was over and they lay side byside without speaking, it began to hail with a brief, rattling fe-
rocity. 
 Downstairs and far away, someone was playing "Hey
Jude" ragtime. 
 The gunslinger's mind turned reflectively inward. 

It was in that hail-splattered silence, just before sleep overtook
him, that he first thought that he might also be the last. 


IXThe gunslinger didn't tell the boy all of this, but perhaps most ofit came through anyway. 
 He had already realized that this was an
extremely perceptive boy, not so different from Alain, who was
strong in that half-empathy, half-telepathy they called the touch. 
"You asleep? 
" the gunslinger asked. 

"No. 
"
"Did you understand what I told you? 
"
"Understand it? 
" the boy asked with surprising scorn. 
"Understand it? 
 Are you kidding? 
""No. 
" But the gunslinger felt defensive. 
 He had never toldanyone about his coming of age before, because he felt ambiva-
lent about it. 
 Of course, the hawk had been a perfectly acceptable
weapon, yet it had been a trick, too. 
 And a betrayal. 
 The first of
many. 
 And tell me-am I really preparing to throw this boy at theman in black? 
"I understood it, all right," the boy said. 
 "It was a game,wasn't it? 
 Do grown men always have to play games? 
 Does
everything have to be an excuse for another kind of game? 
 Do
any men grow up or do they only come of age? 
""You don't know everything," the gunslinger said, trying tohold his slow anger. 
 "You're just a boy. 
""Sure. 
 But I know what I am to you. 
"
"And what is that? 
" the gunslinger asked, tightly. 

"A poker chip. 
"
The gunslinger felt an urge to find a rock and brain the boy. 
Instead, he spoke calmly. 
"Go to sleep. 
 Boys need their sleep. 
"
And in his mind he heard Marten's echo: Go and find yourhand. 


He sat stiffly in the darkness, stunned with horror and terri-fied (for the first time in his existence) of the self-loathing thatmight come afterward. 
XDuring the next period of waking, the railway angled closer to the
underground river, and they came upon the Slow Mutants. 
Jake saw the first one and screamed aloud. 

The gunslinger's head, which had been fixed straight forwardas he pumped the handcar, jerked to the right. 
 There was a rotten
jack-o'-lantern greenness below them, pulsating faintly. 
 For the
first time he became aware of odor-faint, unpleasant, wet. 
The greenness was a face-what might be called a face byone of charitable bent. 
 Above the flattened nose was an insectile
node of eyes, peering at them expressionlessly. 
 The gunslinger
felt an atavistic crawl in his intestines and privates. 
 He stepped up
the rhythm of arms and handcar handle slightly. 
The glowing face faded. 

"What the hell was that? 
" the boy asked, crawling to him. 
"What-" The words stopped dumb in his throat as they came
upon and then passed a group of three faintly glowing forms,
standing between the rails and the invisible river, watching them,
motionless. 
"They're Slow Mutants," the gunslinger said. 
 "I don't thinkthey'll bother us. 
 They're probably just as frightened of us as we
are of-"One of the forms broke free and shambled toward them. 
 Theface was that of a starving idiot. 
 The faint naked body had been
transformed into a knotted mess of tentacular limbs and suckers. 


The boy screamed again and crowded against the gunslinger'sleg like a frightened dog. 
One of the thing's tentacle arms pawed across the flat plat-form of the handcar. 
 It reeked of the wet and the dark. 
 The gun-slinger let loose of the handle and drew. 
 He put a bullet through
the forehead of the starving idiot face. 
 It fell away, its faint
swamp-fire glow fading, an eclipsed moon. 
 The gunflash lay bright
and branded on their dark retinas, fading only reluctantly. 
 The
smell of expended powder was hot and savage and alien in this
buried place. 
There were others, more of them. 
 None moved against themovertly, but they were closing in on the tracks, a silent, hideous
party of rubberneckers. 
"You may have to pump for me," the gunslinger said. 
 "Can you? 
""Yes. 
"
"Then be ready. 
"
The boy stood close to him, his body poised. 
 His eyes took inthe Slow Mutants only as they passed, not traversing, not seeing
more than they had to. 
 The boy assumed a psychic bulge of terror,
as if his very id had somehow sprung out through his pores to
form a shield. 
 If he had the touch, the gunslinger reasoned, that
was not impossible. 
The gunslinger pumped steadily but did not increase hisspeed. 
 The Slow Mutants could smell their terror, he knew 
that, but he doubted if terror alone would be enough to motivate
them. 
 He and the boy were, after all, creatures of the light, and
whole. 
 How they must hate us,he thought, and wondered if theyhad hated the man in black in the same way. 
 He thought not, or
perhaps he had passed among them only like the shadow of a
dark wing in this greater darkness. 


The boy made a noise in his throat and the gunslinger turned his head almost casually. 
 Four of them were charging the hand-car in a stumbling way-one of them in the process of finding a
handgrip. 
The gunslinger let go of the handle and drew again, with thesame sleepy casual motion. 
 He shot the lead mutant in the head. 

The mutant made a sighing, sobbing noise and began to grin. 
Its hands were limp and fish-like, dead; the fingers clove to one an-
other like the fingers of a glove long immersed in drying mud. 
One of these corpse-hands found the boy's foot and began to pull. 
The boy shrieked aloud in the granite womb. 
The gunslinger shot the mutant in the chest. 
 It began to slob-ber through the grin. 
 Jake was going off the side. 
 The gunslinger
caught one of his arms and was almost pulled off balance him-
self. 
 The thing was surprisingly strong. 
 The gunslinger put an-
other bullet in the mutant's head. 
 One eye went out like a candle. 

Still it pulled. 
 They engaged in a silent tug of war for Jake's jerk-
ing, wriggling body. 
 The Slow Mutants yanked on him like a
wishbone. 
 The wish would undoubtedly be to dine. 
The handcar was slowing down. 
 The others began to closein-the lame, the halt, the blind. 
 Perhaps they only looked for a
Jesus to heal them, to raise them Lazarus-like from the darkness. 
It's the end for the boy,the gunslinger thought with perfectcoldness. 
 This is the end he meant. 
 Let go and pump or hold onand be buried. 
 The end for the boy. 
He gave a tremendous yank on the boy's arm and shot themutant in the belly. 
 For one frozen moment its grip grew even
tighter and Jake began to slide off the edge again. 
 Then the dead
mud-mitts loosened, and the Slow Mutie fell on its face behind
the slowing handcar, still grinning. 


"I thought you'd leave me," the boy was sobbing. 
 "I thought . 
. 
. 
 I thought . 
. 
. 
""Hold on to my belt," the gunslinger said. 
 "Hold on just astight as you can. 
"The hand worked into his belt and clutched there; the boy wasbreathing in great convulsive, silent gasps. 
The gunslinger began to pump steadily again, and the hand-car picked up speed. 
 The Slow Mutants fell back a step andwatched them go with faces hardly human (or pathetically so),
faces that generated the weak phosphorescence common to those
weird deep-sea fishes that live under incredible black pressure,
faces that held no anger or hate but only what seemed to be a
semiconscious, idiot regret. 
"They're thinning," the gunslinger said. 
 The drawn-up mus-cles of his lower belly and privates relaxed the smallest bit. 

"They're-"The Slow Mutants had put rocks across the track. 
 The waywas blocked. 
 It had been a quick, poor job, perhaps the work of
only a minute to clear, but they were stopped. 
 And someone
would have to get down and move them. 
 The boy moaned and
shuddered closer to the gunslinger. 
 The gunslinger let go of the
handle and the handcar coasted noiselessly to the rocks, where it
thumped to rest. 
The Slow Mutants began to close in again, almost casually,almost as if they had been passing by, lost in a dream of darkness,
and had found someone of whom to ask directions. 
 A street-
corner congregation of the damned beneath the ancient rock. 
"Are they going to get us? 
" the boy asked calmly. 

"Never in life. 
 Be quiet a second. 
"
He looked at the rocks. 
 The mutants were weak, of course,and had not been able to drag any of the boulders to block 

their way. 
 Only small rocks. 
 Only enough to stop them, to makesomeone-"Get down," the gunslinger said. 
 "You'll have to move them. 
I'll cover you. 
""No," the boy whispered. 
 "Please. 
"
"I can't give you a gun and I can't move the rocks and shoot,too. 
 You have to get down. 
"Jake's eyes rolled terribly; for a moment his body shudderedin tune with the turnings of his mind, and then he wriggled over
the side and began to throw rocks to the right and the left, work-
ing with mad speed, not looking up. 
The gunslinger drew and waited. 

Two of them, lurching rather than walking, went for the boywith arms like dough. 
 The guns did their work, stitching the dark-
ness with red-white lances of light that pushed needles of pain
into the gunslinger's eyes. 
 The boy screamed and continued to
throw away rocks to either side. 
 Witch-glow leaped and danced. 

Hard to see now, that was the worst. 
 Everything had gone to shad-
ows and afterimages. 
One of them, glowing hardly at all, suddenly reached for theboy with rubber boogeyman arms. 
 Eyes that ate up half the mu-
tie's head rolled wetly. 
Jake screamed again and turned to struggle. 

The gunslinger fired without allowing himself to think beforehis spotty vision could betray his hands into a terrible quiver; the
two heads were only inches apart. 
 It was the mutie who fell. 
Jake threw rocks wildly. 
 The mutants milled just outside theinvisible line of trespass, closing a little at a time, now very close. 

Others had caught up, swelling their number. 
"All right," the gunslinger said. 
 "Get on. 
 Quick. 
"
When the boy moved, the mutants came at them. 
 Jake was

over the side and scrambling to his feet; the gunslinger was al-ready pumping again, all out. 
 Both guns were holstered now. 

They must run. 
 It was their only chance. 
Strange hands slapped the metal plane of the car's surface. 
The boy was holding his belt with both hands now, his face
pressed tightly into the small of the gunslinger's back. 
A group of them ran onto the tracks, their faces full of thatmindless, casual anticipation. 
 The gunslinger was full of adrena-
line; the car was flying along the tracks into the darkness. 
 They
struck the four or five pitiful hulks full force. 
 They flew like rot-
ten bananas struck from the stem. 
On and on, into the soundless, flying, banshee darkness. 

After an age, the boy raised his face into the made wind,dreading and yet needing to know. 
 The ghost of gunflashes still
lingered on his retinas. 
 There was nothing to see but the darkness
and nothing to hear but the rumble of the river. 
"They're gone," the boy said, suddenly fearing an end to thetracks in the darkness, and the wounding crash as they jumped
the rails and plunged to twisted ruin. 
 He had ridden in cars; once
his humorless father had driven at ninety on the New Jersey Turn-
pike and had been stopped by a cop who ignored the twenty
Elmer Chambers offered with his license and gave him a ticket
anyway. 
 But he had never ridden like this, with the wind and the
blindness and the terrors behind and ahead, with the sound of 
the river like a chuckling voice-the voice of the man in black. 

The gunslinger's arms were pistons in a lunatic human factory. 
"They're gone," the boy said timidly, the words ripped fromhis mouth by the wind. 
 "You can slow down now. 
 We left them
behind. 
"But the gunslinger did not hear. 
 They careened onward intothe strange dark. 

XI
They went on for three "days" without incident. 
XII
During the fourth period of waking (halfway through? 
 three-quarters? 
 they didn't know-knew only that they weren't tired
enough yet to stop) there was a sharp thump beneath them; the
handcar swayed, and their bodies immediately leaned to the right
against gravity as the rails took a gradual turn to the left. 
There was a light ahead-a glow so faint and alien that itseemed at first to be a totally new element, not earth, air, fire, nor
water. 
 It had no color and could only be discerned by the fact that
they had regained their hands and faces in a dimension beyond
that of touch. 
 Their eyes had become so light-sensitive that they
noticed the glow more than five miles before they approached its
source. 
"The end," the boy said tightly. 
 "It's the end. 
"
"No. 
" The gunslinger spoke with odd assurance. 
 "It isn't. 
"
And it was not. 
 They reached light but not day. 

As they approached the source of the glow, they saw for thefirst time that the rock wall to the left had fallen away and their
tracks had been joined by others which crossed in a complex spi-
derweb. 
 The light laid them in burnished vectors. 
 On some of
them there were dark boxcars, passenger coaches, a stage that had
been adapted to rails. 
 They made the gunslinger nervous, like
ghost galleons trapped in an underground Sargasso. 
The light grew stronger, hurting their eyes a little, but grow-ing slowly enough to allow them to adapt. 
 They came from dark
to light like divers coming up from deep fathoms in slow stages. 


Ahead, drawing nearer, was a huge hangar stretching up intothe dark. 
 Cut into it, showing yellow squares of light, were a se-ries of perhaps twenty-four entranceways, growing from the size
of toy windows to a height of twenty feet as they drew closer. 

They passed inside through one of the middle ways. 
 Written
above were a series of characters, in various languages, the gun-
slinger presumed. 
 He was astounded to find that he could read the
last one; it was an ancient root of the High Speech itself and said:TRACK 10 TO SURFACE AND POINTS WEST
The light inside was brighter; the tracks met and mergedthrough a series of switchings. 
 Here some of the traffic lanterns
still worked, flashing eternal reds and greens and ambers. 
They rolled between the rising stone piers caked black withthe passage of thousands of vehicles, and then they were in some
kind of central terminal. 
 The gunslinger let the handcar coast
slowly to a stop, and they peered around. 
"It's like a subway," the boy said. 

"Subway? 
"
"Never mind. 
 You wouldn't know what I was talking about. 
 Idon't even know what I'm talking about, not anymore. 
"The boy climbed up onto the cracked cement. 
 They looked atsilent, deserted booths where newspapers and books had once
been traded or sold; a bootery; a weapon shop (the gunslinger,
suddenly feverish with excitement, saw revolvers and rifles; closer
inspection showed that their barrels had been filled with lead; he
did, however, pick out a bow, which he slung over his back, and a
quiver of almost useless, badly weighted arrows); a women's ap-
parel shop. 
 Somewhere a converter was turning the air over and
over, as it had for thousands of years-but perhaps would not for
much longer. 
 It had a grating noise somewhere in its cycle which
served to remind that perpetual motion, even under strictly con-
trolled conditions, was still a fool's dream. 
 The air had a mechanized taste. 
 The boy's shoes and the gunslinger's boots made flatechoes. 
The boy cried out: "Hey! 
 Hey . 
. 
. 
"
The gunslinger turned around and went to him. 
 The boy wasstanding, transfixed, at the book stall. 
 Inside, sprawled in the far
corner, was a mummy. 
 It was wearing a blue uniform with gold
piping-a trainman's uniform, by the look. 
 There was an ancient,
perfectly preserved newspaper on the dead thing's lap, and it
crumbled to dust when the gunslinger touched it. 
 The mummy's
face was like an old, shriveled apple. 
 Cautiously, the gunslinger
touched the cheek. 
 There was a small puff of dust. 
 When it
cleared, they were able to look through the flesh and into the
mummy's mouth. 
 A gold tooth twinkled there. 
"Gas," the gunslinger murmured. 
 "The old people made a gasthat would do this. 
 Or so Vannay told us. 
""The one who taught from books. 
"
"Yes. 
 He. 
"
"I bet these old people fought wars with it," the boy saiddarkly. 
 "Killed otherold people with it. 
""I'm sure you're right. 
"
There were perhaps a dozen other mummies. 
 All but two orthree were wearing the blue and gold ornamental uniforms. 
 The
gunslinger supposed that the gas had been used when the place
was empty of most incoming and outgoing traffic. 
 Perhaps once
in the dim ago, the station had been a military objective of some
long-gone army and cause. 
The thought depressed him. 

"We better go on," he said, and started toward Track 10 andthe handcar again. 
 But the boy stood rebelliously behind him. 
"Not going. 
"
The gunslinger turned back, surprised. 


The boy's face was twisted and trembling. 
 "You won't getwhat you want until I'm dead. 
 I'll take my chances by myself. 
"The gunslinger nodded noncommittally, hating himself forwhat he was going to do. 
 "Okay, Jake," he said mildly. 
 "Longdays, pleasant nights. 
" He turned around, walked across to the
stone piers, leaped easily down onto the handcar. 
"You made a deal with someone! 
" the boy screamed afterhim. 
 "I know you did! 
"The gunslinger, not replying, carefully put the bow in front ofthe T-post rising out of the handcar's floor, out of harm's way. 
The boy's fists were clenched, his features drawn in agony. 

How easily you bluff this young boy,the gunslinger told him-self. 
 Again and again his wonderful intuition-his touch-has led him to this point, and again and again you have led him on past
it. 
 And how difficult could it be-after all, he has no friends but you. 
In a sudden, simple thought (almost a vision) it came to himthat all he had to do was give it over, turn around, take the boy
with him, and make him the center of a new force. 
 The Tower did
not have to be obtained in this humiliating, nose-rubbing way, did
it? 
 Let his quest resume after the boy had a growth of years, when
the two of them could cast the man in black aside like a cheap
wind-up toy. 
Surely,he thought cynically. 
 Surely. 
He knew with sudden coldness that turning backward wouldmean death for both of them-death or worse: entombment with
the Slow Muties behind them. 
 Decay of all the faculties. 
 With,
perhaps, the guns of his father living long after both of them, kept
in rotten splendor as totems not unlike the unforgotten gas pump. 
Show some guts,he told himself falsely. 
He reached for the handle and began to pump it. 
 The handcarmoved away from the stone piers. 


The boy screamed: "Wait! 
"And began running on the diago-nal, toward where the handcar would emerge nearer the darknessahead. 
 The gunslinger had an impulse to speed up, to leave the
boy alone yet at least with an uncertainty. 
Instead, he caught him as he leaped. 
 The heart beneath thethin shirt thrummed and fluttered as Jake clung to him. 
The end was very close now. 
XIIIThe sound of the river had become very loud, filling even their
dreams with its thunder. 
 The gunslinger, more as a whim than
anything else, let the boy pump them ahead while he shot a num-
ber of the bad arrows, tethered by fine white lengths of thread,
into the dark. 
The bow was also very bad, incredibly preserved but with aterrible pull and aim despite that, and the gunslinger knew noth-
ing would improve it. 
 Even re-stringing would not help the tired
wood. 
 The arrows would not fly far into the dark, but the last one
he sent out came back wet and slick. 
 The gunslinger only
shrugged when the boy asked him how far to the water, but pri-
vately he didn't think the arrow could have traveled more than
sixty yards from the rotted bow-and lucky to get that far. 
And still the river's thunder grew louder, closer. 

During the third waking period after the station, a spectral ra-diance began to grow again. 
 They had entered a long tunnel of
some weird phosphorescent rock, and the wet walls glittered and
twinkled with thousands of minute starbursts. 
 The boy called
them fot-suls. 
They saw things in a kind of eerie, horror-housesurreality. 


The brute sound of the river was channeled to them by the confining rock, magnified in its own natural amplifier. 
 Yet the sound remained oddly constant, even as they approached the
crossing point the gunslinger was sure lay ahead, because the
walls were widening, drawing back. 
 The angle of their ascent be-
came more pronounced. 
The tracks arrowed through the new light. 
 To the gunslingerthe clumps of fot-sulslooked like the captive tubes of swamp gassometimes sold for a pretty at the Feast of Reaptide fair; to the
boy they looked like endless streamers of neon tubing. 
 But in its
glow they could both see that the rock that had enclosed them so
long ended up ahead in ragged twin peninsulas that pointed
toward a gulf of darkness-the chasm over the river. 
The tracks continued out and over that unknowable drop,supported by a trestle aeons old. 
 And beyond, what seemed an in-
credible distance, was a tiny pinprick of light, not phosphores-
cence or fluorescence, but the hard, true light of day. 
 It was as tiny
as a needle-prick in a dark cloth, yet weighted with frightful
meaning. 
"Stop," the boy said. 
 "Stop for a minute. 
 Please. 
"
Unquestioning, the gunslinger let the handcar coast to a stop. 
The sound of the river was a steady, booming roar, coming from
beneath and ahead. 
 The artificial glow from the wet rock was sud-
denly hateful. 
 For the first time he felt a claustrophobic hand
touch him, and the urge to get out, to get free of this living burial,
was strong and nearly undeniable. 
"We'll go on," the boy said. 
 "Is that what he wants? 
 For us todrive the handcar out over . 
. 
. 
 that. 
. 
. 
 and fall down? 
"The gunslinger knew it was not but said: "I don't know whathe wants. 
"They got down and approached the lip of the drop carefully. 


The stone beneath their feet continued to rise until, with a sud-den, angling drop, the floor fell away from the tracks and the
tracks continued alone, across blackness. 
The gunslinger dropped to his knees and peered down. 
 Hecould dimly make out a complex, nearly incredible webwork of
steel girders and struts, disappearing down toward the roar of the
river, all in support of the graceful arch of the tracks across the
void. 
In his mind's eye he could imagine the work of time and wa-ter on the steel, in deadly tandem. 
 How much support was left? 

Little? 
 Hardly any? 
 None? 
 He suddenly saw the face of the
mummy again, and the way the flesh, seemingly solid, had crum-
bled to powder at the effortless touch of his finger. 
"We'll walk now," the gunslinger said. 

He half expected the boy to balk again, but he preceded thegunslinger out onto the rails, crossing on the welded steel slats
calmly, with sure feet. 
 The gunslinger followed him out over the
chasm, ready to catch him if Jake should put a foot wrong. 
The gunslinger felt a fine slick of sweat cover his skin. 
 Thetrestle was rotten, very rotten. 
 It thrummed beneath his feet with
the heady motion of the river far beneath, swaying a little on un-
seen guy wires. 
 We're acrobats,he thought. 
 Look, Mother, no net. 
I'm flying. 
He knelt once and examined the crossties they were walkingon. 
 They were caked and pitted with rust (he could feel the reason
on his face-fresh air, the friend of corruption; they must be very
close to the surface now), and a strong blow of the fist made the
metal quiver sickly. 
 Once he heard a warning groan beneath his
feet and felt the steel settle preparatory to giving way, but he had
already moved on. 
The boy, of course, was over a hundred pounds lighter andsafe enough, unless the going became progressively worse. 

Behind them, the handcar had melted into the general gloom. 
The stone pier on the left extended out perhaps twenty yards. 
 Itjutted further than the one on the right, but this was also left be-
hind and then they were alone over the gulf. 
At first it seemed that the tiny prick of daylight remainedmockingly constant (perhaps even drawing away from them at
the exact pace they approached it-that would be a fine bit of
magic indeed), but gradually the gunslinger realized that it was
widening, becoming more defined. 
 They were still below it, but
the tracks were rising to meet it. 
The boy gave a surprised grunt and suddenly lurched to theside, arms pinwheeling in slow, wide revolutions. 
 It seemed that
he tottered on the brink for a very long time indeed before step-
ping forward again. 
"It almost went on me," he said softly, without emotion. 
"There's a hole. 
 Step over if you don't want to take a quick trip to
the bottom. 
 Simon says take one giant step. 
"That was a game the gunslinger knew as Mother Says, re-membered well from childhood games with Cuthbert, Jamie, and
Alain, but he said nothing, only stepped over. 
"Go back," Jake said, unsmiling. 
 "You forgot to say "May I? 
'""Cry your pardon, but I think not. 
"
The crosstie the boy had stepped on had given way almost en-tirely and flopped downward lazily, swinging on a rotten rivet. 
Upward, still upward. 
 It was a nightmare walk and so seemedto go on much longer than it did; the air itself seemed to thicken
and become like taffy, and the gunslinger felt as if he might be
swimming rather than walking. 
 Again and again his mind tried to
turn itself to thoughtful, lunatic consideration of the awful space
between this trestle and the river below. 
 His brain viewed it in
spectacular detail, and how it would be: the scream of twisting,

giving metal, the lurch as his body slid off to the side, the grab-bing for nonexistent handholds with the fingers, the swift rattle of
bootheels on treacherous, rotted steel-and then down, turning
over and over, the warm spray in his crotch as his bladder let go,
the rush of wind against his face, rippling his hair up in a carica-
ture of fright, pulling his eyelids back, the dark water rushing to
meet him, faster, outstripping even his own scream-Metal screamed beneath him and he stepped past it unhur-riedly, shifting his weight, at that crucial moment not thinking of
the drop, or of how far they had come, or of how far might be left. 

Not thinking that the boy was expendable and that the sale of his
honor was now, at last, nearly negotiated. 
 What a relief it would
be when the deal was done! 
"Three ties out," the boy said coolly. 
 "I'm gonna jump. 
 Here! 
Right here! 
 Geronimo! 
"The gunslinger saw him silhouetted for a moment against thedaylight, an awkward, hunched spread-eagle, arms out as if,
should all else fail, there was the possibility of flight. 
 He landed
and the whole edifice swayed drunkenly under his weight. 
 Metal
beneath them protested and something far below fell, first with a
crash, then with a splash. 
"Are you over? 
" the gunslinger asked. 

"Yar," the boy said, "but it's very rotten. 
 Like the ideas of cer-tain people, maybe. 
 I don't think it will hold you any further than
where you are now. 
 Me, but not you. 
 Go back. 
 Go back now and
leave me alone. 
"His voice was cold, but there was hysteria underneath, beat-ing as his heart had beat when he jumped back onto the handcar
and Roland had caught him. 
The gunslinger stepped over the break. 
 One large step did it. 
One giant step. 
 Mother, may I? 
 Yes-you-may. 
The boy was shud-dering helplessly. 
 "Go back. 
 I don't want you to kill me. 

"For love of the Man Jesus, walk," the gunslinger said roughly. 
"It's going to fall down for sure if we stand here palavering. 
"The boy walked drunkenly now, his hands held out shudder-ingly before him, fingers splayed. 
They went up. 
Yes, it was much more rotten now. 
 There were frequentbreaks of one, two, even three ties, and the gunslinger expected
again and again that they would find the long empty space be-
tween rails that would either force them back or make them walk
on the rails themselves, balanced giddily over the chasm. 
He kept his eyes fixed on the daylight. 

The glow had taken on a color-blue-and as it came closerit became softer, paling the radiance of the fot-suls. 
Fifty yards ora hundred still to cover? 
 He could not say. 
They walked, and now he looked at his feet, crossing from tieto tie. 
 When he looked up again, the glow ahead had grown to a
hole, and it was not just light but a way out. 
 They were almost
there. 
Thirty yards now. 
 No more than that. 
 Ninety short feet. 
 Itcould be done. 
 Perhaps they would have the man in black yet. 

Perhaps, in the bright sunlight the evil flowers in his mind would
shrivel and anything would be possible. 
The sunlight was blocked out. 

He looked up, startled, peering like a mole from its hole, and saw a silhouette filling the light, eating it up, allowing only
chinks of mocking blue around the outline of shoulders and the
fork of crotch. 
"Hello, boys! 
"
The man in black's voice echoed to them, amplified in thisnatural throat of stone, the sarcasm of his good cheer taking on
mighty overtones. 
 Blindly, the gunslinger sought the jawbone, but
it was gone, lost somewhere, used up. 


He laughed above them and the sound crashed around them,reverberating like surf in a filling cave. 
 The boy screamed and tot-tered, a windmill again, arms gyrating through the scant air. 
Metal ripped and sloughed beneath them; the rails cantedthrough a slow and dreamy twisting. 
 The boy plunged, and one
hand flew up like a gull in the darkness, up, up, and then he hung
over the pit; he dangled there, his dark eyes staring up at the gun-
slinger in final blind lost knowledge. 
"Help me. 
"
Booming, racketing: "No more games. 
 Come now, gun-slinger. 
 Or catch me never. 
"All the chips on the table. 
 Every card up but one. 
 The boydangled, a living Tarot card, the Hanged Man, the Phoenician
sailor, innocent lost and barely above the wave of a stygian sea. 
Wait then, wait awhile. 

"Do I go? 
"
His voice is so loud, he makes it hard to think. 

"Help me. 
 Help me, Roland. 
"
The trestle had begun to twist further, screaming, pullingloose from itself, giving-"Then I shall leave you. 
"
"No! 
 You shall NOT! 
"
The gunslinger's legs carried him in a sudden leap, breakingthe paralysis that held him; he took a true giant's step above the
dangling boy and landed in a skidding, plunging rush toward the
light that offered the Tower frozen on his mind's eye in a black
still life . 
. 
. 
Into sudden silence. 

The silhouette was gone, even the beat of his heart was goneas the trestle settled further, beginning its final slow dance to the
depths, tearing loose, his hand finding the rocky, lighted lip of

damnation; and behind him, in the dreadful silence, the boy spokefrom too far beneath him. 
"Go then. 
 There are other worlds than these. 
"
Then the trestle tore away, the whole weight of it; and as thegunslinger pulled himself up and through to the light and the
breeze and the reality of a new ka, he twisted his head back, for a
moment in his agony striving to be Janus-but there was nothing,
only plummeting silence, for the boy made no cry as he fell. 
Then Roland was up, pulling himself onto the rocky escarp-ment that looked toward a grassy plain, toward where the man in
black stood spread-legged, with arms crossed. 
The gunslinger stood drunkenly, pallid as a ghost, eyes hugeand swimming beneath his forehead, shirt smeared with the white
dust of his final, lunging crawl. 
 It came to him that there would be
further degradations of the spirit ahead that might make this one
seem infinitesimal, and yet he would still flee it, down corridors
and through cities, from bed to bed; he would flee the boy's face
and try to bury it in cunts and killing, only to enter one final 
room and find it looking at him over a candle flame. 
 He had be-
come the boy; the boy had become him. 
 He was become a were-
wolf of his own making. 
 In deep dreams he would become the
boy and speak the boy's strange city tongue. 
This is death. 
 Is it? 
 Is it? 

He walked slowly, drunkenly down the rocky hill towardwhere the man in black waited. 
 Here the tracks had been worn
away, under the sun of reason, and it was as if they had never
been. 
The man in black pushed his hood away with the backs ofboth hands, laughing. 
"So! 
" he cried. 
 "Not an end, but the end of the beginning, eh? 
You progress, gunslinger! 
 You progress! 
 Oh, how I admire you! 
"

The gunslinger drew with blinding speed and fired twelvetimes. 
 The gunflashes dimmed the sun itself, and the pounding ofthe explosions slammed back from the rock-faced escarpments
behind them. 
"Now-now," the man in black said, laughing. 
 "Oh, now-now-now. 
 We make great magic together, you and I. 
 You kill me nomore than you kill yourself. 
"He withdrew, walking backwards, facing the gunslinger, grin-ning and beckoning. 
 "Come. 
 Come. 
 Come. 
 Mother, may I? 
 Yes-
you-may. 
"The gunslinger followed him in broken boots to the place ofcounseling. 


The GUNSLINGER AND THE MAN IN BLACK
CHAPTER FIVE
The Gunslinger and the Man in Black
The man in black led him to an ancient killing ground to makepalaver. 
 The gunslinger knew it immediately: a golgotha, place-
of-the-skull. 
 And bleached skulls stared blandly up at them-
cattle, coyotes, deer, rabbits, bumbler. 
 Here the alabaster xylophone
of a hen pheasant killed as she fed; there the tiny, delicate 
bones of a mole, perhaps killed for pleasure by a wild dog. 
The golgotha was a bowl indented into the descending slopeof the mountain, and below, in easier altitudes, the gunslinger
could see Joshua trees and scrub firs. 
 The sky overhead was a
softer blue than he had seen for a twelve-month, and there was an
indefinable something that spoke of the sea in the not-too-great
distance. 
I am in the West, Cuthbert,he thought wonderingly. 
 If this is not Mid-World, it's close by. 
The man in black sat on an ancient ironwood log. 
 His bootswere powdered white with dust and the uneasy bonemeal of this
place. 
 He had put his hood up again, but the gunslinger could see
the square shape of his chin clearly, and the shading of his jaw. 
The shadowed lips twitched in a smile. 
 "Gather wood, gun-slinger. 
 This side of the mountains is gentle, but at this altitude,

the cold still may put a knife in one's belly. 
 And this is a place ofdeath, eh? 
""I'll kill you," the gunslinger said. 

"No you won't. 
 You can't. 
 But you can gather wood to re-member your Isaac. 
"The gunslinger had no understanding of the reference. 
 Hewent wordlessly and gathered wood like a common cook's boy. 

The pickings were slim. 
 There was no devil-grass on this side and
the ironwood would not burn. 
 It had become stone. 
 He returned
finally with a large armload of likely sticks, powdered and dusted
with disintegrated bone, as if dipped in flour. 
 The sun had sunk
beyond the highest Joshua trees and had taken on a reddish glow. 

It peered at them with baleful indifference. 
"Excellent," the man in black said. 
 "How exceptional youare! 
 How methodical! 
 How resourceful! 
 I salute you! 
" He gig-
gled, and the gunslinger dropped the wood at his feet with a crash
that ballooned up bone dust. 
The man in black did not start or jump; he merely began lay-ing the fire. 
 The gunslinger watched, fascinated, as the ideogram
(fresh, this time) took shape. 
 When it was finished, it resembled a
small and complex double chimney about two feet high. 
 The man
in black lifted his hand skyward, shaking back the voluminous
sleeve from a tapered, handsome hand, and brought it down rapidly,
index and pinky fingers forked out in the traditional sign of the
evil eye. 
 There was a blue flash of flame, and their fire was lighted. 
"I have matches," the man in black said jovially, "but Ithought you might enjoy the magic. 
 For a pretty, gunslinger. 
 Now
cook our dinner. 
"The folds of his robe shivered, and the plucked and guttedcarcass of a plump rabbit fell on the dirt. 
The gunslinger spitted the rabbit wordlessly and roasted it. 
 Asavory smell drifted up as the sun went down. 
 Purple shadows

drifted hungrily over the bowl where the man in black had chosento finally face him. 
 The gunslinger felt hunger begin to rumble
endlessly in his belly as the rabbit browned; but when the meat
was cooked and its juices sealed in, he handed the entire skewer
wordlessly to the man in black, rummaged in his own nearly flat
knapsack, and withdrew the last of his jerky. 
 It was salty, painful
to his mouth, and tasted like tears. 
"That's a worthless gesture," the man in black said, managingto sound angry and amused at the same time. 
"Nevertheless," the gunslinger said. 
 There were tiny sores inhis mouth, the result of vitamin deprivation, and the salt taste
made him grin bitterly. 
"Are you afraid of enchanted meat? 
"
"Yes indeed. 
"
The man in black slipped his hood back. 

The gunslinger looked at him silently. 
 In a way, the face thatthe hood had hidden was an uneasy disappointment. 
 It was hand-
some and regular, with none of the marks and twists which indi-
cate a man who has been through awesome times and has been
privy to great secrets. 
 His hair was black and of a ragged, matted
length. 
 His forehead was high, his eyes dark and brilliant. 
 His
nose was nondescript. 
 The lips were full and sensual. 
 His com-
plexion was pallid, as was the gunslinger's own. 
The gunslinger said finally, "I expected an older man. 
"
"Why? 
 I am nearly immortal, as are you, Roland-for now, atleast. 
 I could have taken a face with which you would have been
more familiar, but I elected to show you the one I was-ah-born
with. 
 See, gunslinger, the sunset. 
"The sun had departed already, and the western sky was filledwith sullen furnace light. 
"You won't see another sunrise for what may seem a verylong time," the man in black said. 


The gunslinger remembered the pit under the mountains andthen looked at the sky, where the constellations sprawled inclockspring profusion. 
"It doesn't matter," he said softly, "now. 
"IIThe man in black shuffled the cards with flying hands. 
 The deck
was huge, the designs on the back convoluted. 
 "These are Tarot
cards, gunslinger-of a sort. 
 A mixture of the standard deck to
which have been added a selection of my own development. 
 Now
watch carefully. 
""What will I watch? 
"
"I'm going to tell your future. 
 Seven cards must be turned,one at a time, and placed in conjunction with the others. 
 I've not
done this since the days when Gilead stood and the ladies played
at Points on the west lawn. 
 And I suspect I've neverread a talesuch as yours. 
" Mockery was creeping into his voice again. 
 "You
are the world's last adventurer. 
 The last crusader. 
 How that must
please you, Roland! 
 Yet you have no idea how close you stand to
the Tower now, as you resume your quest. 
 Worlds turn about your
head. 
""What do you mean, resume? 
 I never left off. 
"
At this the man in black laughed heartily, but would not saywhat he found so funny. 
 "Read my fortune then," Roland said
harshly. 
The first card was turned. 

"The Hanged Man," the man in black said. 
 The darkness hadgiven him back his hood. 
 "Yet here, in conjunction with nothing
else, it signifies strength, not death. 
 You, gunslinger, are the

Hanged Man, plodding ever onward toward your goal over thepits of Na'ar. 
 You've already dropped one co-traveler into that pit,
have you not? 
"The gunslinger said nothing, and the second card was turned. 

"The Sailor! 
 Note the clear brow, the hairless cheeks, thewounded eyes. 
 He drowns, gunslinger, and no one throws out the
line. 
 The boy Jake. 
"The gunslinger winced, said nothing. 

The third card was turned. 
 A baboon stood grinningly astridea young man's shoulder. 
 The young man's face was turned up, a
grimace of stylized dread and horror on his features. 
 Looking
more closely, the gunslinger saw the baboon held a whip. 
"The Prisoner," the man in black said. 
 The fire cast uneasy,flickering shadows over the face of the ridden man, making it
seem to move and writhe in wordless terror. 
 The gunslinger
flicked his eyes away. 
"A trifle upsetting, isn't he? 
" the man in black said, andseemed on the verge of sniggering. 
He turned the fourth card. 
 A woman with a shawl over herhead sat spinning at a wheel. 
 To the gunslinger's dazed eyes, she
appeared to be smiling craftily and sobbing at the same time. 
"The Lady of the Shadows," the man in black remarked. 
"Does she look two-faced to you, gunslinger? 
 She is. 
 Two faces at
least. 
 She broke the blue plate! 
""What do you mean? 
"
"I don't know. 
" And-in this case, at least-the gunslingerthought his adversary was telling the truth. 
"Why are you showing me these? 
"
"Don't ask! 
" the man in black said sharply, yet he smiled. 
"Don't ask. 
 Merely watch. 
 Consider this only pointless ritual if it
eases you and cools you to do so. 
 Like church. 
"

He tittered and turned the fifth card. 
A grinning reaper clutched a scythe with bony fingers. 
"Death," the man in black said simply. 
 "Yet not for you. 
"The sixth card. 

The gunslinger looked at it and felt a strange, crawling antici-pation in his guts. 
 The feeling was mixed with horror and joy, and
the whole of the emotion was unnameable. 
 It made him feel like
throwing up and dancing at the same time. 
"The Tower," the man in black said softly. 
 "Here is theTower. 
"The gunslinger's card occupied the center of the pattern; eachof the following four stood at one corner, like satellites circling a
star. 
"Where does that one go? 
" the gunslinger asked. 

The man in black placed the Tower over the Hanged Man,covering it completely. 
"What does that mean? 
" the gunslinger asked. 

The man in black did not answer. 

"What does that mean? 
" he asked raggedly. 

The man in black did not answer. 

"Goddamn you! 
"
No answer. 

"Then be damned to you. 
 What's the seventh card? 
"
The man in black turned the seventh. 
 A sun rose in a lumi-nously blue sky. 
 Cupids and sprites sported around it. 
 Below the
sun was a great red field upon which it shone. 
 Roses or blood? 

The gunslinger could not tell. 
 Perhaps,he thought, it's both. 
"The seventh card is Life," the man in black said softly. 
 "Butnot for you. 
""Where does it fit the pattern? 
"
"That is not for you to know now," the man in black said. 
 "Orfor me to know. 
 I'm not the great one you seek, Roland. 
 I am

merely his emissary. 
" He flipped the card carelessly into the dy-ing fire. 
 It charred, curled, and flashed to flame. 
 The gunslinger
felt his heart quail and turn icy in his chest. 
"Sleep now," the man in black said carelessly. 
 "Perchance todream and that sort of thing. 
""What my bullets won't do, mayhap my hands will," the gun-slinger said. 
 His legs coiled with savage, splendid suddenness,
and he flew across the fire at the other, arms outstretched. 
 The
man in black, smiling, swelled in his vision and then retreated
down a long and echoing corridor. 
 The world filled with the
sound of sardonic laughter, he was falling, dying, sleeping. 
He dreamed. 
IIIThe universe was void. 
 Nothing moved. 
 Nothing was. 
The gunslinger drifted, bemused. 

"Let's have a little light," the voice of the man in black saidnonchalantly, and there was light. 
 The gunslinger thought in a de-
tached way that light was pretty good. 
"Now darkness overhead with stars in it. 
 Water down below. 
"
It happened. 
 He drifted over endless seas. 
 Above, the starstwinkled endlessly, yet he saw none of the constellations which
had guided him across his long life. 
"Land," the man in black invited, and there was; it heaved it-self out of the water in endless, galvanic convulsions. 
 It was red,
arid, cracked and glazed with sterility. 
 Volcanoes blurted endless
magma like giant pimples on some ugly adolescent's baseball
head. 
"Okay," the man in black was saying. 
 "That's a start. 
 Let'shave some plants. 
 Trees. 
 Grass and fields. 
"

There was. 
 Dinosaurs rambled here and there, growling and whoofing and eating each other and getting stuck in bub-bling, odiferous tarpits. 
 Huge tropical rain-forests sprawled every-
where. 
 Giant ferns waved at the sky with serrated leaves. 
 Beetles
with two heads crawled on some of them. 
 All this the gunslinger
saw. 
 And yet he felt big. 
"Now bring man," the man in black said softly, but the gun-slinger was falling . 
. 
. 
 falling up. 
 The horizon of this vast and fe-
cund earth began to curve. 
 Yes, they had all said it curved, his
teacher Vannay had claimed it had been proved long before the
world had moved on. 
 But this-Further and further, higher and higher. 
 Continents took shapebefore his amazed eyes, and were obscured with clocksprings of
clouds. 
 The world's atmosphere held it in a placental sac. 
 And the
sun, rising beyond the earth's shoulder-He cried out and threw an arm before his eyes. 

"Let there be light! 
"
The voice no longer belonged to the man in black. 
 It was gi-gantic, echoing. 
 It filled space, and the spaces between space. 
"Light! 
"
Falling, falling. 

The sun shrank. 
 A red planet stamped with canals whirledpast him, two moons circling it furiously. 
 Beyond this was a
whirling belt of stones and a gigantic planet that seethed with
gases, too huge to support itself, oblate in consequence. 
 Further
out was a ringed world that glittered like a precious gem within
its engirdlement of icy spicules. 
"Light! 
 Let there be-"
Other worlds, one, two, three. 
 Far beyond the last, one lonelyball of ice and rock twirled in dead darkness about a sun that glit-
tered no brighter than a tarnished penny. 


Beyond this, darkness. 
"No," the gunslinger said, and his word on it was flat andecholess in the black. 
 It was darker than dark, blacker than black. 

Beside this, the darkest night of a man's soul was as noonday, the
darkness under the mountains a mere smudge on the face of
Light. 
 "No more. 
 Please, no more now. 
 No more-""LIGHT! 
"
"No more. 
 No more, please-"
The stars themselves began to shrink. 
 Whole nebulae drewtogether and became glowing smudges. 
 The whole universe
seemed to be drawing around him. 
"Please no more no more no more-"
The voice of the man in black whispered silkily in his ear:"Then renege. 
 Cast away all thoughts of the Tower. 
 Go your way,
gunslinger, and begin the long job of saving your soul. 
"He gathered himself. 
 Shaken and alone, enwrapt in the dark-ness, terrified of an ultimate meaning rushing at him, he gathered
himself and uttered the final answer on that subject:"NEVER! 
"
"THEN LET THERE BE LIGHT! 
"
And there waslight, crashing in on him like a hammer, agreat and primordial light. 
 Consciousness had no chance of sur-
vival in that great glare, but before it perished, the gunslinger saw
something clearly, something he believed to be of cosmic impor-
tance. 
 He clutched it with agonized effort and then went deep,
seeking refuge in himself before that light should blind his eyes
and blast his sanity. 
He fled the light and the knowledge the light implied, and socame back to himself. 
 Even so do the rest of us; even so the best
of us. 


IVIt was still night-whether the same or another, he had no im-mediate way of knowing. 
 He pushed himself up from where his
demon spring at the man in black had carried him and looked at
the ironwood where Walter o'Dim (as some along Roland's way
had named him) had been sitting. 
 He was gone. 
A great sense of despair flooded him-God, all that to doover again-and then the man in black said from behind him:
"Over here, gunslinger. 
 I don't like you so close. 
 You talk in your
sleep. 
" He tittered. 
The gunslinger got groggily to his knees and turned around. 
The fire had burned down to red embers and gray ashes, leaving
the familiar decayed pattern of exhausted fuel. 
 The man in black
was seated next to it, smacking his lips with unlovely enthusiasm
over the greasy remains of the rabbit. 
"You did fairly well," the man in black said. 
 "I never couldhave sent that vision to your father. 
 He would have come back
drooling. 
""What was it? 
" the gunslinger asked. 
 His words were blurredand shaky. 
 He felt that if he tried to rise, his legs would buckle. 
"The universe," the man in black said carelessly. 
 He burpedand threw the bones into the fire where they first glistened and
then blackened. 
 The wind above the cup of the golgotha keened
and moaned. 
"Universe? 
" the gunslinger said blankly. 
 It was a word withwhich he was unfamiliar. 
 His first thought was that the other was
speaking poetry. 
"You want the Tower," the man in black said. 
 It seemed to bea question. 
"Yes. 
"

"Well, you shan't have it," the man in black said, and smiledwith bright cruelty. 
 "No one cares in the counsels of the great ifyou pawn your soul or sell it outright, Roland. 
 I have an idea of
how close to the edge that last pushed you. 
 The Tower will kill
you half a world away. 
""You know nothing of me," the gunslinger said quietly, andthe smile faded from the other's lips. 
"I made your father and I broke him," the man in black saidgrimly. 
 "I came to your mother as Marten-there's a truth you al-
ways suspected, is it not? 
-and took her. 
 She bent beneath me
like a willow . 
. 
. 
 although (this may comfort you) she never
broke. 
 In any case it was written, and it was. 
 I am the furthest
minion of he who now rules the Dark Tower, and Earth has been
given into that king's red hand. 
""Red? 
 Why do you say red? 
"
"Never mind. 
 We'll not speak of him, although you'll learnmore than you cared to if you press on. 
 What hurt you once will
hurt you twice. 
 This is not the beginning but the beginning's end. 

You'd do well to remember that . 
. 
. 
 but you never do. 
""I don't understand. 
"
"No. 
 You don't. 
 You never did. 
 You never will. 
 You have noimagination. 
 You're blind that way. 
""What did I see? 
" the gunslinger asked. 
 "What did I see at theend? 
 What was it? 
""What did it seem to be? 
"
The gunslinger was silent, thoughtful. 
 He felt for his tobacco,but there was none. 
 The man in black did not offer to refill his
poke by either black magic or white. 
 Later he might find more in
his grow-bag, but later seemed very far away now. 
"There was light," the gunslinger said finally. 
 "Great whitelight. 
 And then-" He broke off and stared at the man in black. 


He was leaning forward, and an alien emotion was stamped on hisface, writ too large for lies or denial. 
 It was awe or wonder. 
 Per-
haps they were the same. 
"You don't know," he said, and began to smile. 
 "O great sor-cerer who brings the dead to life. 
 You don't know. 
 You're a fake! 
""I know," the man in black said. 
 "But I don't know . 
. 
. 
 what. 
"
"White light," the gunslinger repeated. 
 "And then-a blade ofgrass. 
 One single blade of grass that filled everything. 
 And I was
tiny. 
 Infinitesimal. 
""Grass. 
" The man in black closed his eyes. 
 His face lookeddrawn and haggard. 
 "A blade of grass. 
 Are you sure? 
""Yes. 
" The gunslinger frowned. 
 "But it was purple. 
"
"Hear me now, Roland, son of Steven. 
 Would you hear me? 
"
"Yes. 
"
And so the man in black began to speak. 
VThe universe (he said) is the Great All, and offers a paradox too
great for the finite mind to grasp. 
 As the living brain cannot con-
ceive of a nonliving brain-although it may think it can-the fi-
nite mind cannot grasp the infinite. 
The prosaic fact of the universe's existence alone defeats boththe pragmatist and the romantic. 
 There was a time, yet a hundred
generations before the world moved on, when mankind had
achieved enough technical and scientific prowess to chip a few
splinters from the great stone pillar of reality. 
 Even so, the false
light of science (knowledge, if you like) shone in only a few de-
veloped countries. 
 One company (or cabal) led the way in this re-
gard; North Central Positronics, it called itself. 
 Yet, despite a

tremendous increase in available facts, there were remarkably fewinsights. 
"Gunslinger, our many-times-great grandfathers conqueredthe-disease-which-rots, which they called cancer, almost con-
quered aging, walked on the moon-""I don't believe that," the gunslinger said flatly. 

To this the man in black merely smiled and answered, "You needn't. 
 Yet it was so. 
 They made or discovered a hundred other
marvelous baubles. 
 But this wealth of information produced little
or no insight. 
 There were no great odes written to the wonders of
artificial insemination-having babies from frozen mansperm-
or to the cars that ran on power from the sun. 
 Few if any seemed
to have grasped the truest principle of reality: new knowledge
leads always to yet more awesome mysteries. 
 Greater physio-
logical knowledge of the brain makes the existence of the soul
less possible yet more probable by the nature of the search. 
 
Do you see? 
 Of course you don't. 
 You've reached the limits of
your ability to comprehend. 
 But never mind-that's beside the
point. 
""What isthe point, then? 
""The greatest mystery the universe offers is not life but size. 
Size encompasses life, and the Tower encompasses size. 
 The
child, who is most at home with wonder, says: Daddy, what is
above the sky? 
 And the father says: The darkness of space. 
 The
child: What is beyond space? 
 The father: The galaxy. 
 The child:
Beyond the galaxy? 
 The father: Another galaxy. 
 The child: Be-
yond the other galaxies? 
 The father: No one knows. 
"You see? 
 Size defeats us. 
 For the fish, the lake in which helives is the universe. 
 What does the fish think when he is jerked
up by the mouth through the silver limits of existence and into 
a new universe where the air drowns him and the light is blue

madness? 
 Where huge bipeds with no gills stuff it into a suffocat-ing box and cover it with wet weeds to die? 
"Or one might take the tip of a pencil and magnify it. 
 Onereaches the point where a stunning realization strikes home: The
pencil-tip is not solid; it is composed of atoms which whirl and
revolve like a trillion demon planets. 
 What seems solid to us is
actually only a loose net held together by gravity. 
 Viewed at their
actual size, the distances between these atoms might become
leagues, gulfs, aeons. 
 The atoms themselves are composed of
nuclei and revolving protons and electrons. 
 One may step down
further to subatomic particles. 
 And then to what? 
 Tachyons? 

Nothing? 
 Of course not. 
 Everything in the universe denies noth-
ing; to suggest an ending is the one absurdity. 
"If you fell outward to the limit of the universe, would youfind a board fence and signs reading DEAD END? 
 No. 
 You might
find something hard and rounded, as the chick must see the egg
from the inside. 
 And if you should peck through that shell (or find
a door), what great and torrential light might shine through your
opening at the end of space? 
 Might you look through and dis-
cover our entire universe is but part of one atom on a blade of
grass? 
 Might you be forced to think that by burning a twig you
incinerate an eternity of eternities? 
 That existence rises not to one
infinite but to an infinity of them? 
"Perhaps you saw what place our universe plays in thescheme of things-as no more than an atom in a blade of grass. 

Could it be that everything we can perceive, from the micro-
scopic virus to the distant Horsehead Nebula, is contained in one
blade of grass that may have existed for only a single season in an
alien time-flow? 
 What if that blade should be cut off by a scythe? 

When it begins to die, would the rot seep into our own universe
and our own lives, turning everything yellow and brown and desiccated? 
 Perhaps it's already begun to happen. 
 We say the worldhas moved on; maybe we really mean that it has begun to dry up. 
"Think how small such a concept of things makes us, gun-slinger! 
 If a God watches over it all, does He actually mete out
justice for a race of gnats among an infinitude of races of gnats? 

Does His eye see the sparrow fall when the sparrow is less than a
speck of hydrogen floating disconnected in the depth of space? 

And if He does see . 
. 
. 
 what must the nature of such a God be? 

Where does He live? 
 How is it possible to live beyond infinity? 
"Imagine the sand of the Mohaine Desert, which you crossedto find me, and imagine a trillion universes-not worlds but
universes-encapsulated in each grain of that desert; and withineach universe an infinity of others. 
 We tower over these universes
from our pitiful grass vantage point; with one swing of your boot
you may knock a billion billion worlds flying off into darkness, in
a chain never to be completed. 
"Size, gunslinger . 
. 
. 
 size. 
. 
. 
"Yet suppose further. 
 Suppose that all worlds, all universes,met in a single nexus, a single pylon, a Tower. 
 And within it, a
stairway, perhaps rising to the Godhead itself. 
 Would you dare
climb to the top, gunslinger? 
 Could it be that somewhere above
all of endless reality, there exists a Room? 
. 
. 
. 
"You dare not. 
"
And in the gunslinger's mind, those words echoed: You dare not. 
VI"Someone has dared," the gunslinger said. 
"Who would that be? 
"

"God," the gunslinger said softly. 
 His eyes gleamed. 
 "God hasdared . 
. 
. 
 or the king you spoke of . 
. 
. 
 or . 
. 
. 
 is the room empty,seer? 
""I don't know. 
" Fear passed over the man in black's blandface, as soft and dark as a buzzard's wing. 
 "And, furthermore, I
don't ask. 
 It might be unwise. 
""Afraid of being struck dead? 
"
"Perhaps afraid of . 
. 
. 
 an accounting. 
"
The man in black was silent for a while. 
 The night was verylong. 
 The Milky Way sprawled above them in great splendor, yet
terrifying in the emptiness between its burning lamps. 
 The gun-
slinger wondered what he would feel if that inky sky should split
open and let in a torrent of light. 
"The fire," he said. 
 "I'm cold. 
"
"Build it up yourself," said the man in black. 
 "It's the butler'snight off. 
"VIIThe gunslinger drowsed awhile and awoke to see the man in
black regarding him avidly, unhealthily. 
"What are you staring at? 
" An old saying of Cort's occurredto him. 
 "Do you see your sister's bum? 
""I'm staring at you, of course. 
"
"Well, don't. 
" He poked up the fire, ruining the precision ofthe ideogram. 
 "I don't like it. 
" He looked to the east to see if there
was the beginning of light, but this night went on and on. 
"You seek the light so soon. 
"
"I was made for light. 
"
"Ah, so you were! 
 And so impolite of me to forget the fact! 


Yet we have much to discuss yet, you and I. 
 For so has it been toldto me by my king and master. 
""Who is this king? 
"
The man in black smiled. 
 "Shall we tell the truth then, youand I? 
 No more lies? 
""I thought we had been. 
"
But the man in black persisted as if Roland hadn't spoken. 
"Shall there be truth between us, as two men? 
 Not as friends, but
as equals? 
 There is an offer you will get rarely, Roland. 
 Only
equals speak the truth, that's my thought on't. 
 Friends and lovers
lie endlessly, caught in the web of regard. 
 How tiresome! 
""Well, I wouldn't want to tire you, so let us speak the truth. 
"He had never spoken less on this night. 
 "Start by telling me what
exactly you mean by glammer. 
""Why, enchantment, gunslinger! 
 My king's enchantment hasprolonged this night and will prolong it until our palaver is done. 
""How long will that be? 
"
"Long. 
 I can tell you no better. 
 I do not know myself. 
" Theman in black stood over the fire, and the glowing embers made
patterns on his face. 
 "Ask. 
 I will tell you what I know. 
 You have
caught me. 
 It is fair; I did not think you would. 
 Yet your quest has
only begun. 
 Ask. 
 It will lead us to business soon enough. 
""Who is your king? 
"
"I have never seen him, but you must. 
 But before you meethim, you must first meet the Ageless Stranger. 
" The man in black
smiled spitelessly. 
 "You must slay him, gunslinger. 
 Yet I think it is
not what you wished to ask. 
""If you've never seen your king and master, how do you know him? 
""He comes to me in dreams. 
 As a stripling he came to me,when I lived, poor and unknown, in a far land. 
 A sheaf of centuries ago he imbued me with my duty and promised me my reward, although there were many errands in my youth and the days
of my manhood, before my apotheosis. 
 You are that apotheosis,
gunslinger. 
 You are my climax. 
" He tittered. 
 "You see, someone
has taken you seriously. 
""And this Stranger, does he have a name? 
"
"O, he is named. 
"
"And what is his name? 
"
"Legion," the man in black said softly, and somewhere in theeasterly darkness where the mountains lay, a rockslide punctuated
his words and a puma screamed like a woman. 
 The gunslinger
shivered and the man in black flinched. 
 "Yet I do not think that is
what you wished to ask, either. 
 It is not your nature to think so far
ahead. 
"The gunslinger knew the question; it had gnawed him all thisnight, and he thought, for years before. 
 It trembled on his lips but
he didn't ask it . 
. 
. 
 not yet. 
"This Stranger is a minion of the Tower? 
 Like yourself? 
"
"Yar. 
 He darkles. 
He tincts. 
He is in all times. 
 Yet there is onegreater than he. 
""Who? 
"
"Ask me no more! 
" the man in black cried. 
 His voice aspiredto sternness and crumbled into beseechment. 
 "I know not! 
 I do
not wish to know. 
 To speak of the things in End-World is to speak
of the ruination of one's own soul. 
""And beyond the Ageless Stranger is the Tower and whateverthe Tower contains? 
""Yes," whispered the man in black. 
 "But none of these thingsare what you wish to ask. 
"True. 

"All right," the gunslinger said, and then asked the world'soldest question. 
 "Will I succeed? 
 Will I win through? 
"

"If I answered that question, gunslinger, you'd kill me. 
""I oughtto kill you. 
 You need killing. 
" His hands had droppedto the worn butts of his guns. 
"Those do not open doors, gunslinger; those only close themforever. 
""Where must I go? 
"
"Start west. 
 Go to the sea. 
 Where the world ends is where youmust begin. 
 There was a man who gave you advice . 
. 
. 
 the man
you bested so long ago-""Yes, Cort," the gunslinger interrupted impatiently. 

"The advice was to wait. 
 It was bad advice. 
 For even then myplans against your father had proceeded. 
 He sent you away and
when you returned-""I'd not hear you speak of that," the gunslinger said, and in hismind he heard his mother singing: Baby-bunting, baby dear, babybring your basket here. 
"Then hear this: when you returned, Marten had gone west, to join the rebels. 
 So all said, anyway, and so you believed. 
 Yet 
he and a certain witch left you a trap and you fell into it. 
 Good
boy! 
 And although Marten was long gone by then, there was 
a man who sometimes made you think of him, was there not? 
 A
man who affected the dress of a monk and the shaven head of a
penitent-""Walter," the gunslinger whispered. 
 And although he hadcome so far in his musings, the bald truth still amazed him. 
 "You. 
Marten never left at all. 
"The man in black tittered. 
 "At your service. 
"
"I ought to kill you now. 
"
"That would hardly be fair. 
 Besides, all of that was long ago. 
Now comes the time of sharing. 
""You never left," the gunslinger repeated, stunned. 
 "You onlychanged. 
"

"Sit," the man in black invited. 
 "I'll tell you stories, as many as you would hear. 
 Your own stories, I think, will be muchlonger. 
""I don't talk of myself," the gunslinger muttered. 

"Yet tonight you must. 
 So that we may understand. 
"
"Understand what? 
 My purpose? 
 You know that. 
 To find theTower is my purpose. 
 I'm sworn. 
""Not your purpose, gunslinger. 
 Your mind. 
 Your slow, prod-ding, tenacious mind. 
 There has never been one quite like it, in all
the history of the world. 
 Perhaps in the history of creation. 
"This is the time of speaking. 
 This is the time of histories. 
"
"Then speak. 
"
The man in black shook the voluminous arm of his robe. 
 Afoil-wrapped package fell out and caught the dying embers in
many reflective folds. 
"Tobacco, gunslinger. 
 Would you smoke? 
"
He had been able to resist the rabbit, but he could not resistthis. 
 He opened the foil with eager fingers. 
 There was fine crum-
bled tobacco inside, and green leaves to wrap it in, amazingly
moist. 
 He had not seen such tobacco for ten years. 
He rolled two cigarettes and bit the ends of each to release theflavor. 
 He offered one to the man in black, who took it. 
 Each of
them took a burning twig from the fire. 
The gunslinger lit his cigarette and drew the aromatic smokedeep into his lungs, closing his eyes to concentrate the senses. 
 He
blew out with long, slow satisfaction. 
"Is it good? 
" the man in black inquired. 

"Yes. 
 Very good. 
"
"Enjoy it. 
 It may be the last smoke for you in a very longtime. 
"The gunslinger took this impassively. 


"Very well," the man in black said. 
 "To begin then:"You must understand the Tower has always been, and therehave always been boys who know of it and lust for it, more than
power or riches or women . 
. 
. 
 boys who look for the doors that
lead to it . 
. 
. 
"VIII
There was talk then, a night's worth of talk and God alone knew
how much more (or how much was true), but the gunslinger re-
membered little of it later . 
. 
. 
 and to his oddly practical mind, lit-
tle of it seemed to matter. 
 The man in black told him again that he
must go to the sea, which lay no more than twenty easy miles to the
west, and there he would be invested with the power of drawing. 
"But that's not exactly right, either," the man in black said,pitching his cigarette into the remains of the campfire. 
 "No one
wants to invest you with a power of any kind, gunslinger; it is
simply inyou, and I am compelled to tell you, partly because ofthe sacrifice of the boy, and partly because it is the law; the natu-
ral law of things. 
 Water must run downhill, and you must be told. 

You will draw three, I understand . 
. 
. 
 but I don't really care, and I
don't really want to know. 
""The three," the gunslinger murmured, thinking of theOracle. 
"And then the fun begins! 
 But, by then, I'll be long gone. 
Goodbye, gunslinger. 
 My part is done now. 
 The chain is still in
your hands. 
 'Ware it doesn't wrap itself around your neck. 
"Compelled by something outside him, Roland said, "You have one more thing to say, don't you? 
""Yes," the man in black said, and he smiled at the gunslinger

with his depthless eyes and stretched one of his hands out towardhim. 
 "Let there be light. 
"And there was light, and this time the light was good. 
IXRoland awoke by the ruins of the campfire to find himself ten
years older. 
 His black hair had thinned at the temples and there
had gone the gray of cobwebs at the end of autumn. 
 The lines in
his face were deeper, his skin rougher. 
The remains of the wood he had carried had turned to some-thing like stone, and the man in black was a laughing skeleton in
a rotting black robe, more bones in this place of bones, one more
skull in this golgotha. 
Or is it really you? 
he thought. 
 I have my doubts, Walter o'Dim . 
. 
. 
 I have my doubts, Marten-that-was. 
He stood up and looked around. 
 Then, with a sudden quickgesture, he reached toward the remains of his companion of the
night before (if it was indeed the remains of Walter), a night that
had somehow lasted ten years. 
 He broke off the grinning jawbone
and jammed it carelessly into the left hip pocket of his jeans-a
fitting enough replacement for the one lost under the mountains. 
"How many lies did you tell me? 
" he asked. 
 Many, he wassure, but what made them good lies was that they had been mixed
with the truth. 
The Tower. 
 Somewhere ahead, it waited for him-the nexusof Time, the nexus of Size. 
He began west again, his back set against the sunrise, headingtoward the ocean, realizing that a great passage of his life had
come and gone. 
 "I loved you, Jake," he said aloud. 

The stiffness wore out of his body and he began to walk morerapidly. 
By that evening he had come to the end of the land. 
Hesat on a beach which stretched left and right forever, deserted. 

The waves beat endlessly against the shore, pounding and pound-
ing. 
The setting sun painted the water in a wide strip of fool's
gold. 
There the gunslinger sat, his face turned up into the fadinglight. 
He dreamed his dreams and watched as the stars came out;
his purpose did not flag, nor did his heart falter; his hair, finer
now and gray at the temples, blew around his head, and the
sandalwood-inlaid guns of his father lay smooth and deadly
against his hips, and he was lonely but did not find loneliness in
any way a bad or ignoble thing. 
The dark came down and the
world moved on. 
The gunslinger waited for the time of the draw-ingand dreamed his long dreams of the Dark Tower, to which hewould someday come at dusk and approach, winding his horn, to
do some unimaginable final battle. 


